Experimenting with Design Thinking in Requirements
Refinement for a Learning Management System
Marcos P. da Soledade Jr1,2, Ricardo S. e Freitas2
Sarajane M. Peres2, Marcelo Fantinato2, Reinhold Steinbeck3, Ulisses F. Ara ´ujo2
1
Quantica TI e Comunicação - Social and Tecnologic Incubator of University of São Paulo
São Paulo - SP - Brazil
2School of Arts, Science and Humanities, University of São Paulo (USP)
São Paulo - SP - Brazil
3Center for Design Research, Stanford University
Stanford - CA - USA
m.soledade@quanti.ca,  steinbeck@stanford.edu,
{ricardo.freitas,sarajane,m.fantinato,uliarau}@usp.br
Abstract. In the information systems development, software engineers seek to
improve the systems’ functionality and usability, which may require a review of
their requirements. Considering a teaching-learning process scenario, guaran-
teeing such goals demands to comply with pedagogical rules and satisfy stu-
dent desires and needs.  This paper reports on an experiment in requirements
refinement for a Learning Management System, involving the system’s users
through the application of the Design Thinking methodology. Design Thinking
is a human-centered set of techniques and tools that supports an iterative pro-
cess to produce, analytically and creatively, solutions for real challenges. Also,
the authors present a set of refined requirements as a result of the experiment.
1. Introduction
Requirements elicitation is one of the first activities carried out during the Information
Systems (IS) development, usually conducted by software engineers together with their
customers. In the teaching-learning process supported by a Learning Management System
(LMS), the requirements are commonly elicited with the program’s pedagogical coordi-
nator, not involving necessarily end users, i.e. the students. The lack of students in this
process may lead to a system that, although able to meet functional requirements, fails
in meeting non-functional requirements (e.g.  usability1).  Thus, in order to improve the
requirements elicitation activity, considering mainly the usability characteristics, it is im-
portant to know some aspects related to end users’ experience, such as emotional and
cognitive features that can point out users’ desires or questions.
This paper discusses an experiment whose objective was to meet a set of teaching-
learning process needs assuming that the students’ participation during the LMS develop-
ment shall be taken as an effective strategy. In this context, to systematize the students’
insertion to the LMS development process, the Design Thinking (DT) methodology was
1 Usability must involve: appropriateness recognisability, learnability, operability, user error protection,
user interface aesthetics and accessibility, as specified in ISO/IEC 25010:2011 guide.
182




applied, so that the student was placed as an active agent in the design process of the
solution, i.e. addressing the LMS requirements. The experiment was designed to let stu-
dents feel free to express their preferences, desires, questions and ideas about the LMS.
The system developers were responsible for refining the software requirements using the
content produced by the students.
The goal of this paper is to describe the experiment, discuss the possibility of
applying commonly used DT strategies in an IS development, and present the refined
requirements for the LMS that resulted from this process.  The paper is structured as
follows: Sections 2 and 3 present, respectively, a brief discussion on DT definitions and
the application of this and similar methodologies within the context of IS development
tasks; Section 4 describes the experiment context, covering both the Virtual Learning
Environment and learning circumstances in which it is used; the application of DT for
requirements refinement is presented in Section 5, whereas the results, showing the refined
requirements, are discussed in Section 6; final considerations are presented in Section 7.
2. Design Thinking
Design Thinking (DT) is frequently defined as a methodology for the development of
innovative and useful solutions. Brown (2008)2  defines DT as “a methodology that im-
bues the full spectrum of innovation activities with a human-centered design ethos.” For
Brown, it is about the use of designers’ sensibility to address what is technologically
appropriate and strategically viable when proposing a solution; DT allows (and does not
discourage) the use of conventional and scientifically proven methods in problem-solving,
but combining them with the designer’s abilities to meet the people’s needs. For Plattner
et al. (2011), DT focuses on the end user, with multidisciplinary collaboration and in-
teractive improvements.  Moreover, Steinbeck (2011) points out that DT focuses on the
design process rather than a product, i.e. something that can emerge from it.
According to Liu et al. (2011), DT refers to a mental process in which concepts are
developed, decisions are taken and problems are solved, using expertise, knowledge and
contextual information to satisfy certain goals (i.e., the design intents).  Although there
are several schools of thought and different definitions for DT, all of them gravitate to the
same philosophy that covers creative thought, the contextual knowledge and scenarios in
which a solution would be applied.  An extensive review, with a great diversity of ref-
erences regarding theories about DT, the philosophies that support them and application
models, is presented by Liikkanen et al. (2011).
DT can be considered a universal methodology since it could be applied in any
field of knowledge and to problems in any complexity level. Specifically for the IS de-
velopment field, DT is studied from two perspectives:  (a) considering that Information
Technology (IT) and IS may support the application of DT and, in this sense, there are
some efforts for the development of tools to provide such support [Uflacker et al. 2011;
Gumienny et al. 2011; Sun and Liu 2009; Liu et al. 2011]; and (b) considering that the
DT methodology can support problem-solving in the IT and IS contexts. The experiment
discussed in this paper is contextualized in the second perspective.
2 T. Brown is CEO of IDEO - Sillicon Valley, one of the top ranking innovative companies in the world.
He has already used his DT skills in companies such as Procter&Gamble and Bank of America.
183




3. Related Works
Several artifacts can be produced as DT outputs, such as policies, mindmaps, processes,
or even solutions addressed to a specific scenario, such as requirements for a computer
system or equations to an optimization problem. Nash et al. (2005) present, for example,
the need of associating Software Engineering techniques to requirements elicitation and
the software evaluation, regarding the needs of computer based teaching-learning process.
These authors also point out a resemblance between system architecture’s techniques and
DT methodology, encouraging such combination.  Examples of initiatives using DT in
conjunction to system’s project management, agile development and prototype-based pro-
gramming are discussed by Plattner et al. (2011). And, in a line directly related to the DT
work, Arantes (2011) presents an experiment in system requirements elicitation using
participatory design, in which a website’s end users assume an active role in the problem
comprehension and in the solution proposition, i.e. the website’s requirements elicitation.
Dynn et al. (2005) describe how the DT process may also be used for model re-
finements. Using the engineering classes context at Stanford University, KTH-Stockolm
and the University of Uppsala (in Sweden), the current educational and pedagogical mod-
els were rethought to introduce DT in freshman years. The combination of DT and UCD
(User-Centered Design), experimented by Gonzalez et al. (2010), illustrates another ini-
tiative in the education area. Students of Human Computer Interaction have applied DT
with UCD into learning activities, projecting solutions related to software design. More-
over, Pasman and Wieringa (2011) discuss a collaboration initiative between a software
company and a research institute, which aimed to support a UCD process. According to
the authors, DT philosophy gradually introduced a new way of thinking for the partici-
pants, motivating activities in which they shared their perspectives and goals.
Jarvis et al. (2012) argue that it is useful and necessary to discuss the theories
correlated to DT, analyze the results of the experiment and, most importantly, show details
about the materials that are used/produced during DT sessions. In this work, the authors
used a photo-essay format in order to describe the backstage of the DT sessions and
the evidences about the prototype and solutions produced during the sessions.  Arantes
(2011) and Pasman and Wieringa (2011) also present in their works several illustrations
showing alternative materials and activities used to express personal behavior changes or
expression ideas, desires and questions - actions inherent to the DT methodologies. The
experiment described in this paper is structured inspired by some of these works.
4. Context of the Experiment: Blended Learning and the LMS
The improvement and the wide applicability of distance learning have been embraced
by educational institutions; however, its real effectiveness may only be achieved when
political, pedagogical and technical forces work together.  Taking this view, a special
initiative, named Programa Univesp3  (Virtual University of São Paulo), was created in
2008 by the São Paulo State Government. It was conceived through a partnership among
the State Secretariat of Economic, Scientific and Technological Development, three public
universities (USP, Unicamp and Unesp4) and funding foundations. Recently, Univesp was
transformed by a state law into the fourth state university of São Paulo.
3 http://www.univesp.ensinosuperior.sp.gov.br/ (in Portuguese)
4 http://www5.usp.br/en/; http://www.unicamp.br/unicamp/?language=en; http://www.unesp.br/eng
184




Among the educational programs offered by Univesp, we highlight in this paper
the lato sensu graduate programs5, which are managed by USP, and focus on those used
for this experiment. These programs have applied a strategy based on a partial renunci-
ation of the traditional teaching methods, mixing: traditional “live” classes, organized in
centers geographically distributed across the State of São Paulo and mediated by tutors,
with “distance” classes, supported by a LMS in which different types of Digital Learning
Objects (DLO) are available.  Examples of DLOs are video lectures produced by pro-
fessors, media and TV producers and sign language speakers, as well as audio-text and
digital animations.  Moreover, through this LMS, students communicate to each others
and to their tutors, take notes, develop some activities and are evaluated by the tutors,
teachers and ad hoc referees. The pedagogical model adopted in these programs follows
the Problem-Based Learning approach [Bound and Feletti 1998].
Facing the need of offering a LMS compliant to such perspective, the programs’
managers, in cooperation with IS professionals, raised a number of functional and non-
functional requirements that should be fulfilled by the LMS (see an overview in Table 1).
This LMS is based on the Moodle 2.2 platform, published under an open-source license.
This platform supports user and group management tools, digital artifacts publishing,
open discussion areas for users, message exchange system and adequate performance to
support a program with approximately 1000 enrolled students as the case of the programs
discussed here.  Since these functionalities do not necessarily meet all the specific stu-
dents’, tutors’ and managers’ needs, this platform was customized and new components
were developed to satisfy the system functional and non-functional requirements.
Table 1. Requirements elicited by managers and the technical team
Functional requirements
1. Publish DLOs in a chronological sequence, organizing each class resource in separated areas, showing one class at a time.
2. Publish repositories where students are able to access all DLOs at once, in a consolidated view.
3. Allow that each student to take notes regarding every video published on the LMS. Those notes should be editable at any
moment, and the LMS should generate a report covering all the student notes.
4.  Manage the students registration and split them in groups, linking each group to the respective tutor, and allow the
interaction between those students and between a student and a tutor, through private messages or public spaces.
5. Have an space to present general information about the program (schedules, bulletin boards, tutorials, etc.).
6. Manage the projects developed and submitted by the students, and have tools to enable collaborative work.
Non-Functional requirements
7. DLOs should be displayed in logical but non-linear layout, allowing for intuitive and motivating access to them.
8. The user interaction with the LMS should be simple, avoiding improper use of it and students’ demotivation.
9. All the system areas should follow a unique visual identity.
10. The visual design should be as pleasant as possible, avoiding the use of long texts and valuing the use of images.
11. The main LMS features should be properly displayed on mobile devices (smartphones and tablets).
By default, Moodle implements only the basic functional requirements requested
by the managers, such as requirements 4 to 6. The context of this paper is focused in the
analysis of the other non-trivial requirements (i.e. functional requirements 1 to 3 and non-
functional requirements 7-11), which needed to be implemented by the technical team.
The graphical interface of the LMS, specially developed for this program, does
not follow the native architecture available in the Moodle platform.  It heavily relies on
the use of several images and dynamic elements, making use of “mosaics” to organize
and link information, as illustrated in Figure 1. This design was mainly developed based
5 Programs that provide a specialization in specific areas and take about two years. Generally, the degree
awarded from such programs are graduate certificates or professional degrees.
185




(a)                                                                                             (b)
Figure 1. LMS Mosaics:  (a) first screen on LMS - graphical menu to the system
sections; (b) internal screen on LMS - graphical menu to access lecture contents.
on the non-functional requirements 7 and 11: the graphical elements have been arranged
in order to improve the user access to the different system areas and to facilitate the
adaptations needed for the implementation on mobile devices (considering touch-screen
displays and smaller screen sizes), as illustrated in Figure 1. In this figure, two mosaics
that have a menu function are presented: (a) a mosaic that links to four different sections
in the platform (each section offers groups of specific functionalities); and (b) a mosaic
that links to DLOs used in one of the distance-learning classes.
Requirements 1 and 2 demand different types of organization to the same content
(the former is chronological, splitting content per classes, and the latter is grouped in the
same space). Figure 2 shows the graphical interface to: (a) the space where weekly con-
tent (for each class) is presented; and (b) the space where all the media of a specific type
of digital content (videos, in this case) is presented in a consolidated form.  Figure 2(c)
presents the video notes tool, which meets requirement 3. These notes can be taken grad-
ually, as long as the user studies the content, and can be edited at any time later.  The
students can also generate a report with their notes from all the videos.
The non-functional requirements 9 and 10 are those that motivated a DT session,
given that a proper way to address all of them would require the system users’ point of
view, with each user expectations, personalities, preferences and familiarities with the
LMS. Since the programs’ managers pointed out the areas presented in Figure 2 as the
ones most frequently used by the students, they were chosen as the first ones to be im-
proved. Requirement 11 also was improved as a result of this initiative by enhancing the
mobile devices support. The requirement 9 is constantly being sought by developers.
(a)                                                                                             (b)   (c)
Figure 2. DLOs: (a) for a class; (b) the video library section; (c) video notes tool
186




5. Design Thinking Applied in the Requirements Review
According to Brown (2008), design thinkers are people able to imagine the world under
multiple perspectives and understand peculiarities of the environment, problems and so-
lutions; they do not focus on problems when dealing with a challenge but see them as an
opportunity, and they are collaborative work enthusiasts. According to Steinbeck (2011),
DT processes strongly emphasize: (i) the acquisition of knowledge about the users of the
product or the process being designed; (ii) the observation about the users to better un-
derstand their viewpoints and their reactions to the solutions proposals; and (iii) and the
generation of as many ideas and solutions as possible. With this in mind, the design team
conducted an experimental DT session for gathering and validation of ideas regarding the
system scope.  The objective of the DT session was to support the LMS requirements
refinement, and thus maximize the success of the systemic solution launched to the users.
The session took place in October 2012, at the “Ideas Atelier” room of the Tech-
nological and Social Incubator of the University of São Paulo, and lasted 90 minutes. It
was conducted by three IS professionals from the design team involved in the LMS de-
velopment process; nine students with distinct undergraduate education and professional
backgrounds6, participated in the session. All students were volunteers and were split to
three groups with three students per group. While the session was being conducted, two
of the IS professionals mediated the groups discussions, whereas the third IS professional
acted as passive observer and noted information potentially useful to the experiment anal-
ysis. The DT session was suported by five main artifacts and actions: (i) the LMS itself,
so that the users could use it and express their opinions; (ii) an environment (Figure 3(a))
specifically set up to stimulate the collaboration among the participants as well as their
creative capacities (with colored papers, post-its, white board, colored pens, computers,
internet access, besides proper furniture and other materials placed to provide comfort
and informality); (iii) proper forms designed to guide the environment observer’s analy-
sis (Figure 3(b)); (iv) proper forms designed to stimulate communication among students
(Figure 3(c)); (v) presentation of graphical interface mockups, illustrating implementa-
tions of some requirements (Figure 4) to work as a starting point for the session.
(a)                                                                                                     (b)   (c)
Figure 3. Artifacts used in the experiment: (a) physical environment; (b) interview
forms’ design; (c) feedback forms’ design.
The interview forms were developed by John Nash7. They guide the DT session
observation in order to provide a structured analysis in four areas:  (a) surprising things
6 This experiment was related to a program aimed to educators (primarily), social agents or education
managements, among others.
7 https://dschool.stanford.edu/groups/designresources/wiki/4dbb2/The Wallet Project.html
187




(a)                                                                                              (b)                               (c)
Figure 4.  Mockups used in the experiment:  (a) for a class; (b) the video library
section; (c) video notes tool.
said by users;  (b) what most concerns users;  (c) learning derived from the interview;
and (4) new topics or questions to explore in the future. Through this structure, mediators
guided the groups interactions to focus on well structured objectives keeping such material
as a support to organize their own observations, which is also useful for the observer.
The feedback forms8  were proposed by Reinhold Steinbeck, one of the co-authors
of this paper. They are intended for making the interviewees explore their considerations
about the session focus - in this case, the mockups (prototypes) of the LMS. This form
aims at splitting the users’ contribution in four segments:                                      (a) I like; (b) I desire; (c) I
have a question; and (d) I have an idea. Each one of them is intended to guide the users’
feedback, preventing broad and superficial contributions, which would not express what
they really feel or think about the system. Furthermore, the division between “desire” and
“idea” segregates the “abstract” from the “concrete”, allowing users to express desires that
they do not have even a clue of how it can be satisfied and, at the same time, demanding
them to look for solutions that can be quickly built. Moreover, the “question” creates a
scenario in which users can criticize and show issues in the prototype, without feeling
embarrassed by the presence of the technical agents that developed the system.
During the first part of the DT session, the three groups used the LMS and talked
freely about the user interaction process. Two groups talked about ideas and experiences
related to the LMS and to the program; whereas, the third group interacted with the sys-
tem itself and exchanged information among them and the mediators. Occasionally, the
groups’ activities were switched, so that all students could express their impressions about
the diverse system’s aspects in more than one opportunity. During this part, only the in-
terview forms were filled.  During the second part of the DT session, the groups were
merged and the mockups were projected onto the screen. Then, the feedback forms were
distributed and the students could write their thoughts in the forms or express themselves
verbally; while the mediators and the observer kept taking notes.
8 http://dschool.stanford.edu/wp-content/themes/dschool/method-cards/i-like-i-wish-what-if.pdf
188




6. Results: Refining the Requeriments
The main reason for conducting the DT session was to co-design the LMS requirements
refinement process along with the users (i.e., the students). In order to present the results
of such an experiment, this section is dedicated to report and discuss the opinions, desires,
ideas and difficulties of the students, raised in the DT session, and the translation of these
aspects into a refined set of system requirements. Moreover, this section presents the new
designs for the system environments implemented once the DT session was carried out.
6.1. Obtaining Data with Students
After the DT session, data provided by students, through the forms and also through the
observed interactions among themselves, were compiled by the mediators, the observer
and other collaborators (co-authors of this paper). The data were then grouped by their
similarities and analyzed according to the authors’ perceptions. Table 2 lists the comments
written by students, expressing their preferences, desires, questions and ideas.  These
data were obtained using the presentation of alternative mockups with possible changes
proposed to the LMS graphical interface (see Figure 4).
Table 2. Students’ comments. Comments’ frequency are in parentheses.
id.  Preferences                                                                                                                                          id.  Desires
1                                                                                                Video abstracts beside the frame; not on top of it (7)   14             Library organization per week (2)
2                                                                                                Text outside the picture; not upon it (2)                15             Filenames of video-lessons as to their numbers and titles (2)
3                                                                                                Text within the picture; not outside it (1)              16             No more only audio-texts (1)
4                                                                                                Images that relate to the video/text theme (2)           17             Text editor with formatting features for notes (5)
5                                                                                                Titles of video files should be meaningful (1)           18             Providing notes without having to open the video (1)
6                                                                                                Notes box below the video; not beside it (2)             19             Option of generating pages with notes formatted for printing (3)
7                                                                                                Frames around texts in the library (1)                   20             Notes listed by course, week and video lesson (1)
8                                                                                                Choice of watching video in full screen (1)              21             Space for notes on texts (2)
9                                                                                                Fewer windows for navigation (2)
10                                                                                               New version more dynamic (1)
11                                                                                               More organized and clean interface (1)
12                                                                                               Beautiful, modern and dynamic visual (1)
id.  Questions                                                                                                                                            id.  Ideas
13                                                                                               Is there a better way to organize my notes? (1)          22             Place for talking to the tutor (1)
                                                                                                                                                          23             Ability to mark videos/texts/weeks as already seen (1)
                                                                                                                                                          24             Ability to download video-lessons in mp3 (for listening in the car,
for example) (1)
Through an analysis on the students’ comments, some issues regarding the LMS
content disposition and the system interface could be realized. Comments 1 to 4 and 6 to
8 pointed out issues related to the GUI design. The complexity inherent to a graphical de-
sign can be seen when taking into account the diversity of opinions that sometimes leads
to antagonic preferences (for example, the opposite preferences mentioned by comments
2 and 3). Comment 8 demonstrated that the video player design was not entirely appro-
priate, since users could not notice the already existing full-screen feature.  Issues with
the content organization were highlighted in comment 14, in which the student requested
an organizational structure not available in the LMS so far.
Indirectly, comments 4, 5, 7, 15 and 23 showed that students are demanding tools
to allow them better manage the program environment and the DLOs. More specifically,
comments 5 and 15 were concerned to the default file names when users download the
resources. Comment 4 was a request for more comprehensive information regarding the
DLOs’ content. Comment 7 revealed a layout issue when presenting a specific DLO el-
ement (that is, the texts), once the students were not able to understand if a given icon
189




was associated to the text above it or below it.  Finally, comment 23 indicated that stu-
dents needed more comprehensive support to manage their study process in the LMS. In
addition to these, comment 9 was the only one related to the interface navigation: new
browser windows need to be opened whenever the students visualize a PDF document or
content hosted into an external website, which bothers users.
Comments 10 to 12 were related to the students’ opinion on the new interface
proposals, which were presented using the mockups (see Figure 4).  These comments
showed a good acceptance rate by the students. Moreover, the interface proposals met the
students’ preferences listed on comments 1, 3, 4, 6 and 7. Comments 13 and 17 to 21 were
related to improvement suggestions on the video-note tool: the tool developed specially
for this program, used to allow students to write notes about each video, while they watch
it.  The notes are linked to the video and are automatically retrieved when the students
watch the video again. Comment 24 was related to an extra format for content delivery.
Finally, comments 16 and 22 were related to decisions taken by the program’s pedagogical
responsible and, despite the impact on technical aspects of the LMS, their analysis are
beyond the scope of this paper; although students are able to send messages through the
Quickmail plugin, they are willing to have access to a synchronous communication tool.
The observations of the mediators and the observer also resulted in important in-
formation for the requirements refinement process seeing that they taken into account
several types of communications from the students: students talking directly to the medi-
ators; students talking to other students; and students thinking aloud. A summary about
these observations is shown in Table 39.  In this table, the information is organized ac-
cording to different LMS aspects. Considering the view of the mediators and the observer
as system developers, the aspects observed were evaluated and classified in terms of the
features and strategies already developed in the system.  Among the observations listed
in Table 3, it’s worth mentioning two of them: 5 and 17. The former shows that during
the DT session, there was a recurrent complaint about the lack of guidance regarding the
use of DLOs published in the LMS. Nevertheless, a special DLO named “Didactic Orga-
nization” exists, in which such instructions are actually provided, published every week,
as a part of the mosaic (Figure 1(b)), which seems to not be seen by students. The latter
raises a possible issue concerning how much the platform (and the program as a whole)
is succeeding in fostering the collaborative work once the tools that allow such work are
placed in the Interactive Space section.
6.2. Building the Refined Requirements List
Supported by the information gathered during the DT session and described in the pre-
vious section, a new functional and non-functional requirements list was built.  In this
new list, some of the original requirements (as presented in Table 1) are refined and doc-
umented with a higher and additional detail level, focusing on the aspects that seem to
be more important to the users. Table 4 shows the requirements refined. Only those re-
quirements that have undergone through refinement are presented (i.e.  requirements 1,
5,6,9 and 10 are kept in their simple forms); for the other ones, one or more additional
requirements with further details are presented.
9 Some of these observations repeat the content of the students’s comments (see Table 2) because some
aspects were very commented during the DT session.
190




Table 3. Mediators and observer’s observations
id.                                                                                                                          Item         Observation
1                                                                                                                            Blogs        - There is no indication of the need to post a message
2                                                                                                                                         - Students do not know if what they post is used or not to evaluate them
3                                                                                                                            Mosaics      - Insufficient texts indicating what to do in the interface
4                                                                                                                            Navigation   - Bar indicating the current week number needs more emphasis
5                                                                                                                                         - There is no text indicating what to do with the DLOs of a course or the steps prior to a course
6                                                                                                                                         - There is no direct access to notes (the video associated with them need to be loaded)
7                                                                                                                            Videos       - The layout of the DLOs in the GUI is indifferent to students (the most important is the clear organization
                                                                                                                                          of them compared to last week/course/module)
8                                                                                                                                         - Students prefer watching streaming videos than after the download
9                                                                                                                            Texts        - Only audio-text upset students (there are materials supporting courses available only in audio)
10                                                                                                                           Library      - Separation per week would really help students (this is a way of organizing content still nonexistent in the
                                                                                                                                          LMS: or texts are associated to lessons or they are in a repository organized by courses)
11                                                                                                                           Notes        -  Students  would  like  a  more  complete  listing,  with  different  possibilities  of  organization          (per
                                                                                                                                          module/week/video-lesson)
12                                                                                                                                        - Chance of formatting annotations with embedded text editor (a what you see is what you get editor)
13                                                                                                                                        - Ability to generate a consolidated and formatted page for printing notes
14                                                                                                                           General      - Possibility to mark, manually, a video lesson or a week as already visited
15                                                                                                                                        - Students fail to find a logical line that shows at what time of the program they are
16                                                                                                                                        - Students quite like the Documents and Tutorials area (a LMS page)
17                                                                                                                                        - Students do not understand what the purpose of the Interactive Space (a LMS section)
Table 4. Refined requirements
Functional requirements
2a - Publish repositories with different organizations (by week, by discipline, by module), where the students are able to
access all DLOs at once, in consolidated views.
3a - Provide a what you see is what you get editor for the notes tool.
3b - Provide different ways to organize and print the notes (by video, by week, by discipline, by module).
3c - Provide a notes tool for textual and audio DLOs.
4a - Improve the message tools to allow a direct talk (i.e. synchronous) between student and tutor.
Non-Functional requirements
7a - Replace the use of video frames by images to indicate some information about the content of the videos.
7b - Improve the designing of the player’s commands to indicate the possibility of watching a video in full screen.
7c - Highligth the DLO “Didactical Organization” in the graphical interface.
7d - Change the video files names (physical names).
7e - Provide a new format for DLOs (mp3).
8a - Highligth the DLOs already visited, in the graphical interface.
6.3. New LMS Releases and Next Steps
Once this DT session was carried out, some improvements were made into the LMS -
influenced by this experiment. Based on the mockups used in the DT session (presented
in Figure 4), which were analyzed and approved by the students, the original DLOs pre-
sentation (as shown in Figure 3) were evolved to the new interface presented in Figure 5.
In Figure 5(a) and (b), the fulfilment for the new requirement 7a can be observed, when
comparared to the exhibited in Figure 3(a) and (b), respectively. Moreover, the new re-
quirement 7d was also met in the current LMS release.
Taking into account that a complex requirement from the original list (requirement
11 in Table 1) was still being developed during the three months since the DT session, the
development team did still not have the opportunity to treat the other new requirements,
besides the 7a and 7b.  From now one, the development team will evaluate the new re-
quirements still not implemented considering the technical feasibility and pedagogical
suitability in order to plan the roadmap for next LMS releases.
Considering the new LMS releases, the development team intends to carry out new
DT sessions aiming at evaluating the current release, including the versions specific for
mobile devices (illustrated in Figure 6), as well involving students from other geographic
191




(a)                                                                                           (b)   (c)
Figure  5.  DLOs in the new LMS release:  (a) for a class;  (b) the video library
section; (c) video notes tool.
locations and with a larger number of participants (both students and mediators).
(a)                                                                                           (b)
Figure 6. Mobile versions: (a) interface for tablets; (b) interface for smartphones
7. Final Considerations
The application of DT techniques to support the requirements refinement tasks in this
context was considered appropriate.  From this experiment, the authors could properly
refine the requirements as well as learn from the system’s users.  An example of lesson
learned was the detection of lack of alignment between the students’ expectations and the
pedagogical organization proposals.  Another perception was that the developers invest
significant time and resources implementing GUI details that are not noticed by the stu-
dents, which was evidenced when variants of mockups with detail changes into the GUI
(such as shadows, color tones and typographic elements) caused small impact on users.
However, the DT session was carried out with few users. Thus, it is possible that there are
other preferences, desires, questions and ideas which could generate other requirements.
Two research lines are planned in the context of this work:  (i) building tools to
analyse the students’ navigation to gather information regarding the students’ behavior
on regular LMS use conditions; and (ii) integrating the LMS system with pedagogical
models developed by the PBL Lab10 at Stanford University which provide communication
channels for virtual brainstorming and collaborative 3D immersive virtual work spaces.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Center for Research on New Pedagogical Architectures (NP-
NAP) of University of São Paulo.
10 http://pbl.stanford.edu
192




References
Arantes, F. L. (2011). Organizational semiotics and participatory design to requirements
elicitation - a case study. In Proc. of 7th Braz. Symp. on Inform. System, pages 322-333.
Bound, D. and Feletti, G. (1998). The Challenge of Problem Based Learning. Routledge.
Brown, T. (2008). Design thinking. Harvard Business Review, 86(6):84-95.
Dynn, C. L., Agogino, A. M., Eris, O., Frey, D. D., and Leifer, L. J. (2005). Engineering
design thinking, teaching, and learning. J. of Eng. Educ., 34(01):103-120.
Gonzalez, C., Gonzalez, E., Cruz, V., and Saavedra, J. (2010).  Integrating the design
thinking into the ucd’s methodology. In IEEE Educ. Eng., pages 1477 -1480.
Gumienny, R., Meinel, C., Gericke, L., Quasthoff, M., LoBue, P., and Willems, C. (2011).
Design Thinking - Understand - Improve - Apply, chapter Tele-Boar: Enabling Efficient
Collaboration In Digital Design Spaces Across Time and Distance, pages 147-164.
Springer-Verlag.
Jarvis, N., Cameron, D., and Boucher, A. (2012).  Attention to detail: annotations of a
design process. In Proc. of the 7th Nordic Conf. on Human-Comp. Interaction: Making
Sense Through Design, pages 11-20.
Liikkanen, L. A., Laakso, M., and Bj örklund, T. (2011). Foundations for studying creative
design practices.  In Proc. of the 2nd Conf. on Creativity and Innovation in Design,
pages 309-315. ACM.
Liu, J., Zhang, M., and Hu, X. (2011).  Dmml:  A design thinking process modeling
language. In Proc. of 12th Int. Conf. on Comp.-Aided Design and Comp. Graph., pages
44-48.
Nash, J. B., Richter, C., and Allert, H. (2005).  Evaluating computer-supported learning
initiatives.  In Khosrow-Pour, M., editor, Encyclopedia of Information Science and
Technology, pages 1125-1129. Idea Group.
Pasman, G. and Wieringa, E. (2011).  Landing design thinking in industry:                    “making
software for bookkeeping, but not in a bookkeeping way”. In Proc. of the 2011 Conf.
on Designing Pleasurable Products and Interfaces, pages 47:1-47:4.
Plattner, H., Meinel, C., and Leifer, L., editors (2011).  Design Thinking - Understand -
Improve - Apply. Springer-Verlag.
Steinbeck,  R.  (2011).   Building creative competence in globally distributed courses
through design thinking. Scientific J. of Media Educ., 29(37):27-34.
Sun, Z. Gao, S. and Liu, J. (2009). A representation of context in design thinking process
modeling. In Proc. of 11th Int. Conf. on Comp.-Aided Design and Comp. Graph., pages
416-421.
Uflacker, M., Kowark, T., and Zeier, A. (2011). Design Thinking - Understand - Improve -
Apply, chapter An Instrument for Real-Time Design Interactions Capture and Anlaysis,
pages 131-146. Springer-Verlag.
193





