VII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação
Organizational Semiotics and Participatory Design to
Requirements Elicitation - A Case Study
Fl ávia Linhalis Arantes1
1N úcleo de Informática Aplicada à Educação (NIED)
Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP)
Campinas - SP - Brazil
farantes@unicamp.br
Abstract. It is already agreed that requirements have a critical impact on the
quality and users satisfaction of the resulting software. In this work, web infor-
mation systems are reviewed from the perspective of organizational semiotics as
being part of an organization, which comprises work practices, rules and views
of the same system by different stakeholders. This paper presents a case study,
where artifacts of the organizational semiotics are exploited in a collaborative
and participatory way to requirements elicitation of a web information system.
1. Introduction
Requirements Engineering (RE) is the process of discovering the purpose for which a
software system was intended by identifying stakeholders and their needs, and docu-
menting these in a form that is suitable to analysis, communication, and implementa-
tion [Nuseibeh and Easterbrook 2000].  Stakeholders may be numerous and their goals
may vary and conflict, depending on the perspectives of their work environment and the
tasks they wish to accomplish.  Baranauskas and colleagues [Baranauskas et al. 2005]
propose a semiotic-based method for stakeholders identification and requirements elici-
tation considering social, political, cultural and ethical issues involved in understanding
the problem in the process of RE. Their approach is based on Organizational Semiotics
(OS) [Liu 2000], which studies organizations using concepts and methods from Semiotics
[Stamper 1973].
If we think about an information system as being part of an organization, which
comprises work practices, rules and views of the same system by different stakeholders;
it is natural to conclude about the advantages of involving users in the information system
development.
The Participatory Design (PD) proposes users active participation in several mo-
ments of a technological product development life cycle [Ehn 1992]. In PD, the ultimate
users of the software make effective contributions that reflect their own perspectives and
needs, somewhere in the design and development life cycle of the software. Active par-
ticipation is more than being used as mere data sources by responding to questionnaires
or being observed while using the software.  User participation is no longer restricted
to designing per se; it is valuable in activities throughout the entire software life cycle
[Muller et al. 1997].
In this work, artifacts of the OS were used in a collaborative and participatory
way to requirements elicitation of a multidisciplinary web site. Results of the case study
322




VII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação
allowed us to observe the contribution of OS to requirements elicitation when we think
about the system as being part of a social organization.
This paper is organized as follows: section 2 gives a brief background about orga-
nizational semiotics and its artifacts that can be applied to requirements elicitation. Sec-
tion 3 presents web information systems from the perspective of OS. Section 4 presents
a web site case study, showing how participatory practices and OS artifacts were applied
to requirements elicitation. Finally, section 5 concludes the paper with some remarks on
future work.
2. Organization Semiotics Artifacts to Requirements Elicitation
Organizational semiotics is the study of organizations using the concepts and methods
of the semiotics.  This study is based on the fundamental observation that all organized
behavior is affected through the communication and interpretation of signs by people,
individually or in groups.  The aims of OS study are to find new and insightful ways
of analysing, describing and explaining organizations [Liu 2000].  In this context, the
role of the system analyst is to help users to articulate their problems, to discover their
information requirements, and to develop a systematic solution to reach the technical
information system.
Artifacts and methods of OS have been reviewed and used to several tasks
related to requirements elicitation,  such as stakeholders identification with their re-
lated responsibilities, better understanding of different information aspects, identifica-
tion of problems,  questions,  solutions and ideas of the information system in focus
[Baranauskas et al. 2005, Bonacin et al. 2006, Simoni et al. 2007]. In the following sub-
sections, some OS artifacts that can be used to support requirements elicitation are des-
cribed.
2.1. OS Onion and Stakeholders Analysis
In a semiotic perspective, different layers of meaning must be considered in the informa-
tion system analysis and software design.  Figure 1 represents the relation between the
different layers of an information system [Liu 2000].
Figure 1. Organizational Semiotics Onion.
At an informal level there is a sub-culture in which meanings are established,
intentions are understood, beliefs are formed and commitments with responsibilities are
323




VII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação
made.  At a formal level, form and rule replace meaning and intention.  At a technical
level, part of the formal system is automated by a computer-based system. The informal
level embodies the formal that, by its turn, embodies the technical level, meaning that
changes in some level have impact in other levels.
The OS layers structure  (known as OS onion) has been used to help stake-
holders analysis before the beginning of a new information system development.  In
this activity, the problem in focus, or design problem, should be clarified and the stake-
holders have to be identified and organized in the informal, formal and technical layers
[Baranauskas et al. 2005, Bonacin et al. 2006]. Figure 2 illustrates the artifact adapted to
guide the problem clarification and the stakeholders analysis in a semiotic perspective.
Figure 2.  Organizational Semiotics onion adapted to problem clarification and
stakeholders analysis.
2.2. Semiotic Ladder
The semiotic ladder (Figure 3) is a structure that organizes the different levels of in-
formation.  Each level deals with a limited set of questions related to signs.  As so,
it favors/supports a semiotic view of information systems requirements considering the
information different aspects.  The semiotic ladder organization expresses the idea of
constructing the properties of a system in each level from the ones identified in lower le-
vels, until reaching the social level, where the signs represent their valuable contributions
[Stamper 2001].
The semiotic ladder has been used as an artifact to support information sys-
tem analysis from requirements elicitation to interface design [Baranauskas et al. 2005,
Schimiguel 2006, Chebabi 2005].
2.3. Evaluation Frame
Evaluation  frames  are  artifacts  constructed  to  analyze  the  current  system              (if  there
is one) and understand what is expected from the new system  [Simoni 2003].   The
evaluation frame has been used to organize the interests,  ideas,  questions and pro-
blems identified by stakeholders during requirements elicitation participatory practices
[Baranauskas et al. 2005, Bonacin et al. 2006, Simoni et al. 2007].   Figure  4  shows a
structure that can be adopted to the evaluation frame.
324




VII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação
Figure 3. The Semiotic Ladder [Liu 2000].
Figure 4. Evaluation frame structure [Simoni 2003].
3. An Organizational Semiotics Perspective to Web Information Systems
According to Melo [Melo 2007], in an Organizational Semiotics perspective, if we con-
sider the web as an example of technical information system, then the global society
could be seen as the informal information system.  The norms to rule their actions (i.e.
development, maintenance and use of the technical systems) would be part of the formal
information system.
If we take a web information system in particular (an institutional portal for ex-
ample), the informal layer would be represented by the institution that owns the portal,
and by all social groups that are interested on its activities.  In the formal layer, the fo-
cus would be in the norms, for example, local and national legislation, strategic planning,
internal regulation, work procedures, contracts, privacy policies, and so on.
The semiotic ladder can support information systems analysis to web information
systems [Melo 2007]:
• Physics: hardware infra-structure, such as, servers, transmission channels, client
computers, input and output devices, etc.
• Empirics:  bandwidth, network protocols, data transmission, access efficiency,
throughput, etc.
• Syntactics:  relates to development frameworks, web programming languages,
W3C recommendations, file systems, documentation, browsers, and so on.
325




VII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação
• Semantics: this layer can be understood according to different point of views. For
example, (1) who are the users, their needs and interests; (2) the meaning assigned
by the designers to interface elements; (3) the meaning that users construct to the
system interfaces; and so on.
• Pragmatics:  relates to established communication,  adopted work procedures,
users intentions, content producers intentions, etc.
• Social World: relates to values, legislation, expectations, cultural influences, be-
liefs, established compromises, and so on.
This brief analysis provides support to the fact that web information systems de-
sign should be understood as a wide perspective, that treats technical aspects as well as
human values aspects, compromises and intentions. This aspects should be considered to
information systems requirements elicitation, as well as interface design activities, evalu-
ation and maintenance.
4. A Multidisciplinary Web Site Case Study
The NIED (Nucleus of Informatics Applied to Education) web site is the object of this
case study. NIED is a multidisciplinary nucleus, which aggregates researchers from se-
veral areas, such as education, pedagogy, computing, arts and engineering; with focus on
informatics in education research. Its web site is expected to meet this interdisciplinary
nature and to highlight the nucleus projects and advances.
NIED’s current web site1 was contracted as a third party service. The lack of users
participation during the design process leaded to dissatisfaction and frustration when the
web site was delivered.
The  site  is  now  under  a                                                                   (re)design  process.   Participatory  practices
[Muller et al. 1997]  are  being  considered  and  supported  by  organizational  semiotics
[Liu 2000] artifacts.  In this study case, the requirements elicitation phase is described.
The main contribution of this paper is to show a web information system case study that
joins participatory practices and OS artifacts with focus on requirements elicitation.
In the following subsections, stakeholders identification, requirements elicitation
and validation phases applied to NIED’s web site are described, together with the OS
artifacts used to support each activity.
4.1. Stakeholders Identification
The first step to requirements elicitation was to clarify the design problem and to identify
the users (or stakeholders) to take part in the participatory practices.  In order to per-
form this two activities, a brief participatory workshop was conducted with NIED’s board
members (researchers, teachers, coordination and administrative staff)2.
The OS onion artifact, presented in Figure 2, was used to support this activity.
Firstly, the design problem (or problem in focus) was exposed by the workshop mediator
as being “the development of a web site to meet NIED’s interdisciplinary nature and to
highlight the nucleus projects and advances”. The workshop mediator explained the OS
1 http://www.nied.unicamp.br/. Accessed in January, 24th, 2011.
2 The first workshop happened at October 1st, 2010; and lasted about 1 hour.
326




VII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação
onion artifact to the participants. Through a brainstorming, they helped to identify stake-
holders and to classify them in informal, formal and technical layers. Figure 5 summarizes
this activity results.
Figure 5. OS onion applied to NIED’s web site stakeholders identification.
In the inner layer, the problem in focus (NIED’s web site) is represented. In the
technical layer, part of the formal system is automated - so technical stakeholders were
identified (developers, analysts and web designers). In the formal layer, norms, work pro-
cedures and internal rules are established. At this level, people who rule work procedures
at NIED were identified - these are coordination, researchers, teachers, secretary, finance
staff and informatics staff. In the informal layer, the NIED itself and other social groups
interested on its activities were identified - undergraduates, master and PhD candidates,
trainees, scholar, external community interested in books or projects developed by NIED,
COCEN (Interdisciplinary Nucleus and Research Centers Coordination) and GGTE (Ed-
ucational Technologies Manager Group).
4.2. NIED’s Web Site Requirements Elicitation
Once the stakeholders were identified, another participatory workshop supported by or-
ganization semiotics artifacts were conducted with focus on requirements elicitation. At
least one person of the following stakeholders groups took part in the workshop3: deve-
lopers, analysts, web designers, researchers, secretary, informatics, undergraduates, PhD
candidates, scholars, trainees, COCEN and GGTE.
In the second workshop, the mediator firstly revisited the OS onion artifact, filled
in the first workshop. The design problem were also reviewed, as some participants were
not present in the first workshop because they were identified as stakeholders in that oc-
casion.
The workshop mediator also presented other two artifacts that would be used to
requirements elicitation: the evaluation frame (Figure 4) and the semiotic ladder (Figure
3).
With support of the evaluation frame artifact, the mediator asked the participants
to identify questions, problems, ideas and solutions for the site and write them in post-its.
The stakeholders of each layer (informal, formal and technical) were all together in this
3 The second workshop happened at October 22th, 2010; and lasted about 3 hours.
327




VII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação
activity. After writing in the post-its, each one exposed to the group his/her questions and
ideas to NIED’s site, according to the vision they had of the system. In order to organize
and register the users contributions, an evaluation frame poster was filled with the post-its
by the mediator. Figure 6(a) shows the workshop participants, (b) the mediator filling the
evaluation frame poster and, (c) the completed artifact in the end of the workshop.
Figure 6.  (a) Stakeholders in the participatory workshop; (b) Mediator filling the
evaluation frame, an OS artifact adopted to support the participatory require-
ments elicitation activity; (c) Evaluation frame completed.
User participation in different semiotic levels led to heterogeneous ideas of the
system. When these ideas were exposed to the group, they were enriched in a participa-
tory manner.  Tables 1, 2 and 3 summarize the evaluation frame main results, showing
contributions to the informal, formal and technical layers, respectively.  For each ques-
tion/problem a solution/idea was proposed.
The semiotic ladder (Figure 3) was also adopted to support requirements elicita-
tion (mainly non-functional requirements). With this artifact was possible to reorganize
some human aspects of information related to social world (compromises), pragmatics
(intentions) and semantics (meanings).
Some compromises registered in the semiotic ladder were related to information
security and availability, compliance with legislation (Unicamp norms, W3C recommen-
dations, accessibility laws), different browsers compatibility, and keeping the site up to
date.
The intentions observed about the stakeholders needs and interests were related
to ease the content management, to improve the site visibility (access rate), to improve
NIED’s projects visibility, and to make the site more intuitive and dynamic.
328




VII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação
Table 1. Evaluation frame results for informal layer.
Questions and Problems                                                                         Ideas and Solutions
1) The projects in the site are usually out-                                                   1) Someone have to cover the project’s
dated.                                                                                         upgrade.
2)  Tell  the  story  of  NIED,  including                                                     2) Make a time line, indicating projects,
projects and people.                                                                           participants, and important events.
3) More integration of NIED’s commu-                                                           3) Create NIED’s community as a social
nity (students, researchers, teachers, ...).                                                   network and access it from the site.
4) NIED’s web site internationalization                                                        4) Use automatic translation (like google
                                                                                               translate)
5) In the current site, it is difficult to find                                                5) Put these information in the main page.
NIED’s address and location.
6) Make the site more interesting.                                                             6) Increase the visibility of projects with
                                                                                               multimedia.
7) Make the site more interactive                                                              7) Use blogs.
Table 2. Evaluation frame results for formal layer.
Questions and Problems                                                                         Ideas and Solutions
1) Enable users to buy books.                                                                  1) Implement electronic commerce.
2) Lack of administrative resources in the                                                     2)  Create  an  Intranet  to  administrative
current site.                                                                                  subjects.
3)  Problems  with  meeting  schedule  in                                                      3) Implement scheduling to NIED’s meet-
NIED’s physical space.                                                                         ing room.
4) Customize some common areas in the                                                          4) Make a minimum template to projects
site.                                                                                          and personal home pages.
5) Problems to keep private areas up to                                                        5)  Design  simpler  administration  inter-
date.                                                                                          faces to encourage users to update their
                                                                                               areas.
6) More integration with NIED’s research                                                       6) Allow access to projects’ web pages
projects.                                                                                      according to user permissions.
7) More integration with NIED’s research                                                       7)  Allow  community  contributions  re-
area.                                                                                          lated to projects research focus.
8) It is difficult to keep the site up to date                                                 8) Decentralize - allow multiple users to
with events and news.                                                                          to edit this area.
9)  It  is  difficult  to  keep  productions                                                   9) Decentralize - each researcher respon-
(books, memos, papers) up to date.                                                             sible for his/her projects.
10) Ease access to NIED’s books.                                                               10) Make a digital library.
The observations about meaning focused on usability, accessibility, internationa-
lization, understandable interfaces, conceptualization of the interface by the stakeholders,
and the use of time line metaphor.
After the workshop, the semiotic ladder were reviewed and updated mainly with
infrastructure aspects. Its results are presented in Figure 7.
Besides requirements elicitation, the participatory workshop supported by organi-
329




VII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação
Table 3. Evaluation frame results for technical layer.
Questions and Problems                                                                       Ideas and Solutions
1) Make the site accessible (at least to vi-                                                 1) Adopt W3C WAI (Web Accessibility
sual impaired users).                                                                        Initiative).
2) See NIED’s news without entering the                                                      2) Use RSS and/or social networks.
site.
3) It is difficult to find information in the                                                3) Make the site map.
current site.
4) Access the site using other platforms.                                                    4)  Consider  mobile  devices                       (such  as
                                                                                             PDAs).
                                                                                             - Keep the site up to date
Social                                                                                       - Guarantee information security
World                                                                                        and availability
- Compliance with legislation
Compromises ...
- Browsers compatibility
- Easy content management
Pragmatics
- Improve the site visibility (access rate)
Intentions ...                                                                               - Improve NIED's projects visibility
                                                                                             - Make the site more intuitive and dynamic
                                                                                             - Usability, accessibility
                                                                                             - Understandable interfaces
Semantics                                                                                    - Stakeholders conceptualization of the interface
Meanings ...                                                                                 - Timeline metaphor
                                                                                             - Internationalization
Syntactics                                                                                   - Free and accessible technology
Languages, softwares,                                                                        - XHTML, CSS, RSS
formats ...                                                                                  - CMS Drupal, PHP, Apache server
Empirics                                                                                     - Performance (response and access time)
performance,                                                                                 - Bandwidth
capacity...                                                                                  - Backup frequency
Physical                                                                                     - Unicamp network
                                                                                             - NIED's server
machines,                                                                                    - No break
infraestructure...                                                                           - Backup disc
Figure 7. Semiotic ladder artifact applied to NIED’s web site.
zational semiotics artifacts served to outline a common view for the aspects involved in
NIED’s site (re)design, according to heterogeneous stakeholders impressions. Its results
relate mainly to accessibility, maintainability, dissemination of projects, content decen-
tralization and compromises with upgrades of news and projects.
The workshop results were discussed later with the technical team and the coor-
dination, aiming to complement and contribute to requirements elicitation that should be
further validated by the stakeholders.
330




VII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação
4.3. Requirements Validation
The third participatory workshop was organized with the stakeholders for the purpose of
delimiting the scope of the redesign4.  The requirements were classified into functional
and non-functional, as suggested by Sommerville [Sommerville 2003].
Before the second workshop, the following requirements were reformulated and
validated by the coordination and technical team:
• Electronic commerce does not fit in NIED’s educational nature.
• There is already an Intranet for some administrative matters. There is no need to
create another.
• Community contributions to projects also imply in responsibilities with posted
content.
• Decentralize content publishing and management whenever possible.
• The digital library and mobile devices access were considered interesting require-
ments, but due to the limited development team, they will not be considered for
now.
Firstly, the semiotic ladder and the evaluation frame developed in the last work-
shop were revisited.  Afterward, the functional and non-functional requirements were
presented and considered one by one.
The most prioritized functional requirements related to other ways to spread news
(RSS and social networks), to ease the access to NIED’s books and projects, to customize
projects and staff pages, to decentralize content management, and to represent NIED’s
community.
The non-functional requirements highlighted by the stakeholders are related to
accessibility, usability, metaphor to content organization (time line view), visual identity,
updated content, and emphasis on NIED’s projects.
4.4. Discussion
It  is  an  agreement  that  a  software  cannot  function  in  isolation  from  the  organiza-
tional and social context in which it is embedded.   According to Baranauskas et al
[Baranauskas et al. 2005], the Organizational Semiotics methods allow to encompass a
system level view, involving the team into considerations about the formal and informal
levels; instead of emphasizing the behavior of the software system as usually proposed by
traditional methodologies.
As a multi-disciplinary and human-centered process, the participatory approach
facilitated discussion among the stakeholders during the workshops, leading to a better
understanding of the context and social implications of the system. Communication be-
tween the stakeholders was facilitated by the Organizational Semiotics artifacts, which
allowed meaning negotiation and context understanding by a shared representation of the
data being captured, analyzed, and discussed.
Requirement Engineering is concerned with interpreting and understanding stake-
holder terminology, concepts, viewpoints and goals.  With participatory workshops the
terminology can be naturally originated from the stakeholders themselves, who express
their ideas in post-its, and discuss their viewpoints and goals with others in the group.
4 The third workshop happened at November 12th, 2010; and lasted about 2 hours.
331




VII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação
5. Conclusion and Future Work
Inefficient requirements elicitation has been one of the causes of delivered systems that
do not meet their customers requirements; like happened with NIED’s current web site
when it was delivered. Moreover, requirements engineering is often regarded as a time-
consuming and bureaucratic process.  In this paper, a study case that adopted a partici-
patory approach supported by organization semiotics artifacts to requirements elicitation
was presented.  OS provided artifacts for the participatory workshops to guide stake-
holders identification and requirements elicitation.
Results  achieved  in  this  case  study,  as  well  as  in  other  application  of  the
theoretical  framework  of  Organizational  Semiotics  to  information  system  design
[Bonacin et al. 2004, Bonacin et al. 2006, Simoni et al. 2007], encourage its use to bridge
the gap between requirements elicitation and more formal specification and analysis tech-
niques.  As a future work, participatory practices supported by OS are going to be ex-
ploited with study cases in other phases of web information systems engineering.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to users that took part in the participatory workshops.
Thanks to FAEPEX/UNICAMP and AFPU/UNICAMP for funding the project presenta-
tion.
References
Baranauskas, M. C. C., Schimiguel, J., Simoni, C. A. C., and Medeiros, C. B. (2005).
Guiding the process of requirements elicitation with a semiotic approach.  In Inc., L.
E. A., editor, Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction, volume 3, pages 100-110, Las Vegas, USA.
Bonacin, R., Baranauskas, M., and Liu, K. (2004).  From ontologu charts to class dia-
grams: semantic analysis aiding systems design. In Proceedings of 6th ICEIS, Porto,
Portugal.
Bonacin, R., Simoni, C. A. C., Melo, A. M., and Baranauskas, M. C. C. (2006).  Or-
ganisational semiotics: guiding a service-oriented architecture for e-government.  In
Baranauskas, M. C. C. and Liu, K., editors, Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Organisational Semiotics, pages 47-58, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
Chebabi, R. Z. (2005).  Modelagem e proposta de sistema para mediar processos de
comunicação em organizaç ões enxutas. Master’s thesis, Institute of Computing, Uni-
camp, Campinas, Brazil.
Ehn, P. (1992). Usability: Turning technologies into tools, chapter Scandinavian design:
on participation and skill, pages 96-132.  Oxford University Press, Inc., New York,
NY, USA.
Liu, K. (2000).  Semiotics in Information Systems Engineering.  Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
332




VII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação
Melo, A. M. (2007).  Design Inclusivo de Sistemas de Informaç ão na Web.  PhD thesis,
Institute of Computing, Unicamp.
Muller, M. J., Haslwanter, J. H., and Dayton, T. (1997). Handbook of Human-Computer
Interaction, chapter Participatory Practices in the Software Lifecycle, pages 255-297.
Elsevier.
Nuseibeh, B. and Easterbrook, S. M. (2000). Requirements engineering: a roadmap. In
ICSE - Future of SE Track, pages 35-46.
Schimiguel, J. (2006). Um framework para a avaliaç ão de interfaces de aplicaç ões SIG
web no domínio agrícola.  PhD thesis, Institute of Computing, Unicamp, Campinas,
Brazil.
Simoni, C. A. C. (2003).  A prática de desenvolvimento de software e a abordagem da
semi ótica organizacional. Master’s thesis, Institute of Computing, Unicamp.
Simoni, C. A. C., Melo, A. M., and Baranauskas, M. C. C. (2007). Project Management
and Risks Management in Complex Projects, chapter Towards a social-based process
for information system development: a case study, pages 177-192. Springer.
Sommerville, I. (2003). Software Engineering. 6th edition.
Stamper, R. (1973).  Information in business and administrative systems.  John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., New York, NY, USA.
Stamper, R. K. (2001).  Information, organization and technology: studies in Organisa-
tional Semiotics, chapter Organisational Semitics: information without the computer?,
pages 115-171. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Bostom.
333





