Carolina Chiao1, Lucinéia Heloisa Thom2, Cirano Iochpe1, Manfred Reichert3
1Institute of Informatics - Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul
Av. Bento Gonçalves, 9500,   91501-970 - Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
2Institute of Database and Information Systems - University of Ulm
Oberer Eselsberg, Geb. O27, 89069 - Ulm, Germany
3Faculty of Electrical Engineering Mathematics and Computer Science -
University of Twente - 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
{cchiao,  ciochpe}@inf.ufrgs.br,  lucineia.thom@uni-ulm.de,
m.u.reichert@cs.utwente.nl
workflow activity
functions (e.g., notification,
discuss  three  pattern
rns). Moreover we gather
ide set of real process
only enough but also
ere subject  of  the
nces or combination of
ess models analyzed. In
larger research we apply these patterns as wetlhes analyses results in the
development of a suite for process modeling anm alziation.
1. Introduction
During the last years, companies have been exploring numerous techniques for
business process management (BPM) in order to align their information systems in a
process-oriented way and to stay competitive in their market. Accompanying this trend
the  significance  of  BPM  has  increased  and  new  quality  standards  have  emerged.
According to the quality standard ISO 9001:200, for example, an organization should
be mainly represented by its core business processes rather than by its organizational
chart. If BPM is associated with Information Technology (IT), it will become possible to
offer  additional  benefits  to  the organization, such as:  (a) precise and unambiguous
description of the existing business processes; (b) improvements regarding the definition
of new processes; (c) effectiveness regarding the work coordination between different
agents; (d) real time gathering of precise information about process executions; and (e)
standardization of business processes.
For (computerized) business processes there exists a variety of fragments which
can  be  understood  as  self-contained  activity  blocks  with  a  well-defined  semantics
[Thom 2006a], [Thom 2006b]. In particular, a certain process fragment(or recurrent
business  function) may  occur  several  times  within  one                                   (or  different)  process




definition(s). As an example, consider the evaluation process for price adjustment as
depicted in Figure 1. This process includes activities with the following partial order: (a)
a decision activity (to fix whether the input is a shopping order or not) (b) activity ‘send
e-mail to manager informing about price adjustment’; (c) activity ‘evaluate request of
price adjustment’;  (d) activity  ‘notify managers about conclusion of evaluation;  (e)
activity ‘notify managers about automatic approval’; and (f) activity ‘prepare request to
be sent’. Altogether this process comprises fragments having generic semantics that can
be described as patterns such as decision (activity a), notification (activities b, d and e),
and task execution request (activities c and f).
Figure 1: Evaluation process for price adjustment
Recently, research on workflow patterns has emerged in order to increase the
reuse of recurring workflow structures. More precisely, different workflow patterns have
been proposed for control flow modeling [Aalst 2003], resource management [Russell
2004],  data  modeling  [Russell                                                                2005],  service  interaction   [Barros   2005],  workflow
exception handling [Russell 2006]. All these pattern sets have in common that they are
relevant for implementing a workflow modeling tool, or for defining or evaluating a
particular process description language. However, these structural patterns provide only
a partial answer to the question what business functions a modeler has to consider
repeatedly in various process models.
Usually, such process fragments[Flores 1998], [Medina-Mora 1992], [Malone
2004], [Muehlen 2002] are re-designed for each workflow application. Of course, this
lack of reusing model fragments and process knowledge has resulted in high costs and
error rates regarding the modeling and maintenance of process-oriented applications.
While there is some research reported on how metadata can be organized to manage
large-scale modeling projects (cf. [Thomas and Scheer 2006]), to our best knowledge
there exists no (empirical) work evidencing the existence of recurrent patterns in real
workflow applications. Furthermore, there is no work on which patterns are needed and
how  good  they  may  support  the  modeling  of  at  least  specific  kinds  of  business
processes.  Beyond  that,  contemporary  workflow  modeling  tools  do  not  provide
functionalities that enable users to define, query, and reuse such patterns in a proper
way.
Concerning this problematic in an earlier work we presented a first approach
towards the implementation of workflow activity patterns based on an Event-driven
Process Chains (EPCs) tool [Thom 2007a], [Keller 1992]. Recently we proposed a suite
for both process modeling and normalization based on the reuse of semantic process
patterns  (see  [Thom  2007b]). In this paper we gather samples of workflow activity




patterns. However, the main contribution of this paper is the description of a case study
where we analyzed  190 real process models from different organizations as well as
application domains. We had analyzed not only the frequency of each pattern frequency,
within the set of process models, but the frequency of specific sequences of them.
Taking the results of the case study we show that the workflow activity patterns do not
only exist in real workflow applications, but are also necessary and sufficient to model
all the workflow processes which were subject of our investigation. We believe that the
use of these patterns together with other existent patterns (e.g., control flow patterns
[Aalst 2003]) might not only reduce design effort (e.g., it is a small set of patterns that
seems to require little effort to learn) but also optimize and improve the quality of it
(e.g., the user can reuse design solutions stored in a knowledge database). This database
is part of a larger research where we propose a suite for workflow design based on
patterns reuse (cf. [Thom 2007a], [Thom 2007b]).
The outline of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives an overview of
the workflow activity patterns. In particular, we discuss the approval, notification and
unidirectional as three examples. Section 3 gathers the results of an extensive case study
where we investigated the existence of the patterns in  190 process models. In this
section we also show how complete is the set of patterns for the design of the  190
processes. In Section 4 we present some patterns combinations by dividing the set of
process models in System-Intensive and Human-Intensive processes. This classification
is useful to obtain more precise results concerning the kind of processes the patterns are
more suitable to be found. Moreover, this information will be used in the development
of a knowledge database of patterns. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper and gives an
outlook on future research.
2.   Workflow Activity Patterns
A WORKFLOW ACTVITY PATTERN refers to the description of a recurrent business function
frequently  found  in  business  processes                                                    (e.g.,  notification,  decision,  approval).  We
derived a set of 7 patterns from an extensive study based on the literature (cf. [Thom
2006a]   and                                                                                  [Thom                                              2006b]).   The   patterns   are   approvaļ   question-answering,
unidirectional and bi-directional performati,einformation, notification  and decision
patterns.
A block activity is suitable to represent each pattern according to [WfMC 2005].
The block activity concept is particularly suited because it allows to encapsulate the
well-defined semantics and to represent their atomic characteristics. This means that all
activities  defined  inside  a  block  activity  pattern  must  be  completed  before  the
superordinated workflow can continue its execution.
We  describe  three  example  patterns  with  the  Business  Process  Modeling
Notation (BPMN). The complete set of patterns can be found in [Thom 2006a]. For each
pattern  we  describe                                                                         “context”,                                         “problem”,                                                         “forces”  and   “Solution”.  The  solution
includes one  “design choice”. Currently we are working on the improvement of the
patterns documentation. We are giving examples of the patterns use, defining desigh
choices and describing how they can be implemented.




Pattern1:  APPROVAL
Context: A document must be evaluated by one or more organizational role.
Problem: How to model a human decision-making in the workflow process?
Forces:
-                                                                                              In  case  of  multi-approvals                                                                                                                                                                            (concurrent),  the  number  of  times  that  the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      decision-making activity is repeated may vary depending on the level of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      centralization of authority (less or more) as well as the direct supervision of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      work existent in the organizational unit(s) where the process is executed.
-                                                                                                                                                   The decision-making activity is generally performed by a human.
-                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The decision-making activity must have more than one kind of response (e.g.
approval and reproval).
Solution: To include in the workflow, a human activity that characterizes a point of
decision-making on the sub-product in question (e.g. a document requiring approval).
This decision-making activity will be repeated according to the level of centralization
existent  in  the  organizational  units  where  it  is  executed.  Figure                     3  shows  a  single
approval.
Figure 3: Approval pattern
In Fig.  3 an organizational role reviewer performs a document review either
resulting  in  an  approval  or  disapproval.  In  case  of  multi-approvals,  it  would  be
necessary  concurrent  activities.  The                                                        “Make  final  decision”(cf.  Figure  3)  would  be
executed only when all reviewers had performed their revisions The revisions would be
then  performed  multiple  times  in  parallel                                                 (concurrent)  or  in  sequence                       (iterative)
according to the number of organizational roles specified or until disapproval occurs.
Generally, the number of organizational roles is connected to the level of centralization
(in high positions of the organization) with respect to decision-making.
Pattern 2: UNIDIRECTIONAL PERFORMATIVE
Context: In a workflow, there is a moment that the process must request the execution
of an activity to the system or to an organizational role involved in the process.




Problem: While modeling the workflow, how to send a request without waiting for the
result of the activity execution?
Forces:
-                                                                                            The receiver’s response is not required.
-                                                                                            The process must keep its execution without waiting for the activity to be
completed.
-                                                                                            The request can be done to the system or a human.
Solution: To include in the workflow model the sequence of activities  (see Fig.  4)
representing  the  unidirectional  performative  message.  The  sequence  of  activities
comprises  the  generation  of  a  work  item  in  the  receiver  worklist.  However,  the
workflow does not wait for a receiver response to continue execution.
Figure 4: Unidirectional Performative Pattern
A  sender uses unidirectional performative messages to request the execution of an
activity from a receiver. As shown in Fig. 4, an activity execution request results in a
work item being assigned to a receiver (i.e., a specific workflow participant responsible
for  the  activity execution).  After  that,  the  process  may continue execution without
waiting for a response.
Pattern 3.    NOTIFICATION
Context: During the process execution, some specific events have more relevancy such
that the process must inform some organizational roles about them.
Problem: While modeling the workflow, how can we keep the involved roles informed
about some process instance events?
Forces:
-T he notification must be sent by an electronic way.
-T he process does not have to wait for a reading response to continue execution.
-T he notification generally contains the status of a process activity (e.g., completed,
document approved, rejected).
Solution: To include in the workflow the structure concerning the notifying and do not
wait for response. Figure 5 shows how this structure works. There’s the sending of the
notification and its receiving. These activities must inform the involved roles in the




process about news inherent to the respective workflow, such as, for example, the
approval (or reproval) of a document, or a task that has achieved its timeout.
Figure 5: Notification Pattern
3. Evidencing the Existence of Workflow Activity Patterns by Analyzing
Real-World Process Models
With the goal to search for the existence of the workflow activity patterns in real-world
applications we analyzed  190 process models. These workflows have been modeled
with the Oracle Builder tool and have stemmed from 12 different organizations related
to  different  application  domains.  Notice  that  we  analyze  process  models  and  not
instances or logs generated by the execution of them. We do that because the semantic
of the activities is important to the identification of the processes. Table 1 characterizes
the process models subject of our analyses.
Size of the                                                                                    Kind of decision-making   Examples of process models we       Number of   process
company                                                                                                                  analyzed                            models analyzed
1 small                                                                                        Decentralized             Management of internal activities   17
1 large                                                                                        Decentralized             TQM and management of activities    11
6 large                                                                                        Centralized               TQM; control of software access;    133
                                                                                                                         document management
4 large                                                                                        We had no access to       Help Desk, User feedback;           29
                                                                                               information about these   document approval
companies
Table 1: Core characteristics of the analyzed proce     ss models
We have obtained the following results from the case study, i.e. the process models
analyses:
a)   evidence with high probability that the workflow activity patterns exemplified
in this paper exist in real workflow applications;
b)   evidence that the set of patterns is both necessary and sufficient to model all
190 process models analyzed; and
c)   identification of sequence of patterns based on the classification of the process
[Le Clair 2007].




3.1. Method Used to Analyze the Workflow Processes
For each activity pattern we calculated its support value (S). In the context of this paper,
S  represents the number of occurrences of each pattern  (P) in a set of  190 process
models. For those models comprising more than one occurrence of the same pattern just
one was considered. The following formula was considered to calculate the support:
Where:
S                                                                                              =      F (P)
F(P) = frequency of a specific workflow activity
pattern   in   the total set of process models
TT
TT = total number of process models
Initially, we identified and annotated workflow activity patterns in all process
models we analyzed. Afterwards, for all process models we counted the number of
occurrences of each pattern. The obtained result then was divided by the total number of
analyzed process models (i.e. 190 in our case). Accordingly, the (P) for this calculation
corresponds to a specific pattern while TT means the set of process models.
3.2. Frequency of Workflow Activity Patterns in Real-World Process Models
The UNIDIRECTIONAL and BI-DIRECTIONAL PERFORMATIVE PATTERNS, DECISION PATTERN, NOTIFICATION
PATTERN and INFORMATIVE PATTERN are not dependent on specific application domains or
organizational structure aspects. This fact mainly explains why they were identified with
high-probability in practically all process models analyzed. The same applies to the
APPROVAL PATTERN. This can be explained by the high degree of centralization on decision-
making existing in the organizational units for which we analyzed their processes. This
high centralization implies the use of approval activities. Besides that, several process
models belong to applications related to approval contexts. By contrast, most of the
analyzed  process  models  do  not  comprise  QUESTION-ANSWERING  activities.  The  use  of
question-answering activities depends on the kind of process model being modeled. It is
used in those processes where some question can occur. Figure 6 graphically illustrates
the frequency of each activity pattern in the set of process models analyzed.
                                                                                               Frequency of each pattern in the set of 190 workflo                  w models
90%
83%
80%
70%                                                                                            65%                                                   64%
60%
60%                                                                                            54%
50%
Support
40%
30%
20%                                                                                                                                                                            16%
10%
                                                                                                                                                                                             2%
0%
Unidirectional                                                                                 Bi-directional                                        Notification   Decision   Informative   Question-   Approval
Performative                                                                                   Performative                                                                                  answering
Figure 6: Frequency of the workflow patterns in rea                                            l-world process models




                                                                                               tivity Patterns for Workflow
Modeling
The main goal of the study case presented in this paper is the measurement of the
frequency which each one of the workflow activity patterns happens in the set of process
models that has been analyzed. This was done in order to verify whether these business
functions                                                                                      (e.g.,  task  execution  request,  notification)  could  really  be  considered  as
activity patterns with high probability of reuse in business as well as workflow process
design at least those with similar characteristics of the processes we analyzed.
While some activity patterns are identified only by the analysis of the activity
description (e.g., decision, approval and notification patterns), others required a more
detailed analysis. For instance, the INFORMATIVE PATTERN is identified in activities where
the user provides an information to the system (e.g., by the fulfillment of a field in the
context of an activity)  (cf.[Thom  2006a]). In the case of the UNIDIRECTIONAL  and BI-
DIRECTIONAL PERFORMATIVE PATTERNS, both the activity description and its execution result
(i.e., mandatory or not to trigger the next activity in the process) are important to
measure how often the patterns occur.
What really surprised us is the fact that all analyzed workflow processes can be
defined as a composition of the investigated patterns (cf. Figure 7 for an example). That
is, the set of workflow activity patterns is necessary and sufficient to design all 190 real
process models that were subject of our analyses. In each process, a specific activity
pattern may appear zero or more times combined with other patterns.
This fact can be considered as a very important one which points out to new
questions to be investigated as part of a future work. For instance, how much could this
set of patterns be helpful if it was to be integrated into a workflow design tool? One
could think of an intelligent software module which relies on both a workflow activity
patterns repository in order to help designers to complete their workflow design. First
initiative in this approach we present in [Thom 2007a] and [Thom 2007b]. Figure 7
shows a process model sample where all activities match to some activity pattern.
Notification
Unidirectional
Bi-directional                                                                                 pattern
                                                                                                                                                                                     Performative
pattern
pattern
Notification
pattern
Notification
pattern
Decision
Unidirectional
Informative                                                                                    pattern                                                                               Performative
Approval
pattern                                                                                        pattern
pattern
Figure 7: A payment process built up exclusively fr                                            om the combination of
workflow activity patterns




4. Identifying Sequences of Workflow Activity Patterns in Real Process
Models
Some process fragments can occur many times in the same process definition [Thom
2006a].  Each  time  a  specific  fragment  occurs,  there  may  have  successive  process
fragments that can also occur with more frequency than other fragments.
With the objective of evidencing which are the workflow activity patterns that
succeed with more frequency one specific pattern, we analyzed 151 of the 190 process
models, which were subject of our case study. Again we analyzed the process models
and not the execution logs.
Initially we made a preliminary investigation where we analyze, for each process
activity  and  its  respective  workflow  activity  pattern  associated,  what  was  the
subsequent(s) pattern(s) that follow them. By doing that, we noticed that most of the
patterns pairs had low support value and confidence. Figure  8 illustrates one of the
obtained results of this first analysis. Notice that even the most frequent pair of this
example (DECISION PATTERN  NOTIFICATION PATTERN) has a low probability (29%).
Figure 8: Decision Pattern Subsequent Patterns on t     he preliminary analyses
By  analyzing  the  process  models,  we  observed  that  some  kinds  of  activity
patterns, and their respective pairs, appear with more frequency in determined types of
processes. We noticed that process including decision-making activities (i.e., approvals)
present higher probability of being followed by the NOTIFICATION PATTERN. This fact is
mainly explained because the organizational roles involved in the processes must be
notified about the result of the approval process.
In order to increase the support and confidence of the pattern pairs, we decided
to classify the processes into business process categories. For that, we studied some of
the  main classifications found in the literature  [Hammer  2001],  [Harrington  1991],
[Dowson  1987],                                                                              [Leymann  1999].  However,  most  of  them  classify  processes  by
application domains. Accordingly, those approaches were not feasible to our analyses
because the set of processes we were investigating do not cover all the categories
described on these works. We chose then the classification proposed by Le Chair where
and human-intensive[Le Clair 2007].
The system-intensive processes are characterized by being handled on straight-
through  basis,  which  means  that  there  is  minimal  or  no  human  touch  and  few




exceptions. The human-intensive processes require people to get work done by relying
on and interacting extensively with business applications, databases, documents and
other people. This type of process requires human intuition or judgment for decision-
making during individual steps.
Having this clear separation between the processes, we divided the set of studied
process models into processes that have human interaction and processes that don’t have
human interaction. The result of this classification is 31 processes system-intensive and
120 processes human-intensive. Figure  9 shows the results of this investigation over
decision patterns in system-intensive processes. Notice that the probability of having a
DECISION PATTERN  NOTIFICATION PATTERN pair has increased to 50%.
Figure 9: Decision pattern subsequent patterns by a                                           nalyzing only the system-
intensive processes
5. Conclusions
In this paper we presented examples of workflow activity patterns which can be used to
design business process and workflow models respectively. In particular we reported the
results of empirical studies we had performed in order to measure the frequency with
which each workflow activity pattern occurs within a set of 190 process models. This
analysis  was  accomplished  in  order  to  verify  whether  specific  business  functions
frequently  found  in  business  processes                                                    (e.g.,  task  execution  request,  notification,
approval)  may  be  considered  as  patterns  with  high  probability for  reuse.  We  also
showed that by dividing the processes we analyzed into system-intensivand human-
intensiveit was possible to identify pairs of patterns which were more frequently present
in the processes.
The main advantages of this approach can be summarized as follows: (a) the
completeness and necessity of the workflow activity patterns has been evidenced at least
for the design of the process models subject of our analyses; (b) the patterns are tool-
independent, which make them easier to be adapted for any business process modeling
tool; (c) it is a small set of patterns which may reduce complexity in user learning;
The result of the case study we presented in this paper will be used in the
development  of  a  suite  to  the  analysis  and  properties  verification  in  workflow
specification (e.g., correctness, completeness, deadlock, processes equivalence, livelock,
model checking). This suite will have a knowledge database that will store the workflow




activity patterns as well as the results of our case study. We consider that this knowledge
database will help on matching the patterns with business process extracted from legacy
code and will help the user on designing the business process from scratch. By using the
pattern pairs, we can help the user by suggesting which pattern is better combined with
the one that he/she has already modeled.
As future work we intend to perform additional analyses considering process
models from different application domains (e.g., health insurance and automotive).   Our
goal is to identify not only pairs of co-related patterns but also sequences of workflow
activity patterns, including more than three patterns in sequence. In this context we also
intend  to  continue  studying the  workflow  classifications  so  that we can find more
specific classification and with smaller granularity to divide the set of processes. A less
generic classification will be useful when we try to converge on the user needs using
just a few steps. Finally we consider making an experiment for comparing process
modeling with and without workflow activity patterns support.
Acknowledgements
The  authors  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  Coordination  for  the  Improvement  of
Graduated  students                                                                           (CAPES),  the  Institute  of  Databases  and  Information  Systems
of  the  University of  Ulm  (Ulm,  Germany)  and  the  Informatics  Institute  of  Federal
University of Rio Grande do Sul (Porto Alegre, Brazil).
References
Aalst,  W.M.P.  van  der.                                                                     (2003)                                                               “Workflow  Patterns”.  In  Distributed  and  Parallel
Databases, 14(3), pages 5-51.
Bernstein,  P.  A.;  Hadzilacos,  V.;  Goodman,  N.  (1987)  “Concurrently  Control  and
Recovery in Database Systems”. Reading: Addison-Wesley. 370p.
Barros, A.; Dumas, M.; Hofstede, ter A. (2005) Service Interaction Patterns. In W.M.P.
usiness
Process Management,v. 3649 of Lecture Notes in Computer Scienpp. 302-318.
Springer-Verlag.
Dowson, M. (1987) Interation in the Software Process Review of the 3rd International
Software Process Workshop. In Proceedings of the 9th international Conference on
Software   Engineering (Monterey,   California,   United   States).   International
Conference on Software Engineering. IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos,
CA, 36-41.
Flores, F.; Graves, M.; Hartfield, B.; Winograd, T. (1988) “Computer Systems and the
6,
2 (Apr. 1988), 153-172.
Hammer, M.; Champy, J.  (2001)  “Reengineering the Corporation: A Manifesto for
Business Revolution”. HarperBusiness. 257p.
Harrington, H. J. (1991) “Business Process Improvement: The Breakthrough Strategy
for Total Quality, Productivity, and Competitiveness”. McGraw-Hill. 274p.




                                                                                            Keller, G.; Nüttgens, M.; Scheer; A.-W. (1992) Semantische Prozessmodellierung auf
der  Grundlage                                                                              “Ereignisgesteuerter  Prozessketten                                                  (EPK)”.  Heft           89,  Institut  für
Wirtschaftsinformatik, Saarbrücken, Germany.
Le Clair, C.; Teubner, C. (2007) The Forrester Wave: Business Process Management
For Document Processes, Q3 2007.
Leymann, F.; Roller, D.  (1999)  “Production Workflow: Concepts and Techniques”.
Prentice Hall. 479p.
Malone,  T.  W.;  Crownston,  K.;  Herman,  G.  A.                                          (2003)                                                                               “Organizing  Business
Knowledge: The MIT Process Handbook”. MIT Press.
Medina-Mora, R.; Winograd, T.; Flores, R.; Flores, F.  (1992)  “The action workflow
approach to workflow management technology”. In Proceedings of the 1992 ACM
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative .81k2-288.
Muehlen, M. zur. (2002) “Workflow-based process controlling”: foundations, design,
and  application  of  workflow-driven  process  information  systems.  Berlin:  Logos
Verlag.´299 p.
Russell,  N.;  Aalst,  W.M.P.  van  der;  Hofstede,  A.;  Edmond,  D.  (2004)  “Workflow
Resource  Patterns:  Identification,  Representation  and  Tool  Support”.  In  Lecture
Notes in Computer Scienc2,(005), 216-232.
Russell, N.; Hofstede, A. H. M Ter; Edmond, D. (2005) “Workflow Data Patterns”. In:
Proceedings of the 24th ER, pp. 353-368.
Russell, N.; Aalst, W.M.P. Van Der; Hofstede, A. Ter. (2006) “Workflow Exception
Patterns”. In: Proceedings of 18th CAiSE, 18, p.288-302.
Thom, L. H.;   Iochpe, C.;   Amaral, V. L. do;   Viero, D. M.  (2006a)  “Toward block
activity patterns for reuse in workflow design”. In: Workflow Handbook of WfMC,
pp. 249-260.
Thom, L. H.                                                                                 (2006b)  “A Pattern-based Approach for Business Process Modeling”.
PPGC: Porto Alegre. Available at: http://www.biblioteca.ufrgs.br/bibliotecadigital/.
(Thesis).
Thom, L. H; Lau, J.M.; Iochpe, C.; Mendling, J. (2007a) “Extending Business Process
Modeling Tools with Workflow Pattern Reuse”. In: Proceedings of 9th International
Conference on Enterprise Information Systems, Funchal, Madeira, Portugal.
Thom, L. H., Chiao, C. M., Iochpe, C., Hess, G. N., Nascimento, G. S., Reichert; M
(2007b):                                                                                    “Towards  an  Intelligent  Designer  based  on  the  Reuse  of  Workflow
Patterns”. In: 1st Brazilian Workshop on Business Process Management to be held in
conjunction with WEBMEDIA 2007, Gramado, Brazil.
Thomas,  O.;  Scheer,  A.-W.  (2006)  “Tool  Support  for  the  Collaborative  Design  of
Reference Models - A Business Engineering Perspective”. In: 39th HICSS-39, CD-
ROM / Abstracts Proceedings. .
Workflow Management Coalition, 2005. “Process Definition Interface”: XML Process
Definition Language. Doc. Number: WFMC-TC-1025. (2005).





