VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
An Investigation on the Use of Navigation Devices in Smart
Transportation Systems
Ana L. C. Bazzan and Guilherme G. Azzi
1  Instituto de Informática - Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS)
Caixa Postal 15.064 - 91.501-970 - Porto Alegre - RS - Brazil
{bazzan,ggazzi}@inf.ufrgs.br
Abstract. In large urban areas, until recently, people used to choose a route
having in mind the general, high-level mental map of the urban traffic network.
With the dissemination of the use of navigation devices such as GPS, all roads
may now be part of a path.  Therefore two questions arise, that are related
to the performance of the traffic network as a whole, and to the effects of the
use of these navigation devices on travelers that usually only do short trips in
their own neighborhoods. Our preliminary results show that the average overall
travel times indeed decrease with the use of GPS. However, travelers who used
to avoid arterial roads are strongly penalized.
1. Introduction
The number of large metropolitan areas with more than ten million inhabitants is increas-
ing rapidly, with the number of so-called mega-cities now at more than 20. For compari-
son, in 1950 there were 83 cities with populations exceeding one million, with New York
being the sole city with population above ten million.  This increase in the number of
mega-cities has strong consequences to traffic and transportation.
It is intuitively assumed that smart transportation can be benefited from smart-
gadgets.  Indeed, such devices are changing the paradigm in many systems, including
transportation. This can be observed, e.g., in urban areas such as the city of São Paulo:
until a decade ago or so, people used to choose a route having in mind the general, high-
level mental map of the urban traffic network, that means, the main arterials were known
to a lesser or greater extent, while the rest of the network links remained basically un-
known, except for those areas close to the traveler origin and destination. This has lead
to some traffic patterns that were more or less predictable.  Moreover, users of residen-
tial or secondary roads used to use these roads for trips within their own neighborhoods.
With the dissemination of the use of navigation devices such as GPS, all roads may now
be part of a path. Therefore two questions arise. The first relates to the performance of
the traffic network as a whole, i.e., does travel time decreases (as intuitively believed) if
navigation devices gets widely used? The second question relates to the effects of these
navigation devices use on travelers that usually do only short trips in their own, known
neighborhood, thus tending to avoid jammed arterials.
The goal of this work is to answer these two questions by means of an agent-
based model. In the next section we present some work that is related to ours though in
fact the second question has barely been addressed.  The agent-based model is detailed
in Section 3, while the settings and results achieved so far are discussed in Section 5.
Conclusions and the future work are then presented in Section 6.
156




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
2. Background and Related Work
Smart transportation systems are likely to depend more and more on a good modelling of
the transportation system at hand because only this way can the effect of new technologies
be tested and evaluated. Basically, there are two approaches to the modelling of traffic:
macroscopic and microscopic.  The former is mainly concerned with the movement of
vehicles, that means, with the aggregate level.  In the microscopic modelling, one may
go to the individual level. Each road user can be described as detailed as desired (given
computational restrictions), thus permitting the model of travelers’ behaviours.  Travel
and/or route choices may be considered, and this is a key issue in simulating traffic, since
those choices are becoming increasingly more complex.  Using agent-based simulation
is a promising technique for microscopic traffic models as the driver’s behaviour can be
described incorporating complex and individual decision-making.
Modelling of traffic scenarios with multiagent systems techniques is not new.
However, the focus has been mainly on logistics regarding transportation scenarios. On
the other hand, the work proposed here focuses on a fine-grained level.  At this level,
there have been an increasing number of research studies.  Very few works investigate
the effect of navigation devices, and, to the best of our knowledge, none at the agent-
based level. Therefore, here we refer to some that are related to agent-based assignment
of demand (without use of navigation devices): [Balmer et al. 2004, Bazzan et al. 2012,
Chmura and Pitz 2007, Kl ügl and Bazzan 2004]. In summary, agent-based modelling and
simulation can be used in transportation systems in various ways. In this particular paper
we use agent-based simulations as a way to investigate what happens in traffic networks
when some conditions change, as, e.g., what happens when navigation devices increase
the travelers’ awareness of the traffic network.
3. Methods
The agent-based microscopic simulation proposed here was implemented using the traf-
fic simulator called SUMO1. The main parameters are: the network G to be simulated,
the number |N | of travelers that will have their trips distributed according to the origin-
destination (OD) matrix, and a boolean indicating whether or not GPS navigation devices
are used by the travellers.
The following procedure is then repeated until there are vehicles in the network
(i.e. until not everyone is at its destination). For each traveler i, the simulator will move i
through its path. At each link, SUMO checks whether each i is at its destination. If yes, i
computes its own travel time.
This procedure is used no matter navigation devices are used or not. What distin-
guishes these two cases is the kind of knowledge traveler i has about the network. This
of course determines its route.  When navigation devices are used, the procedure works
as usually in routing, i.e., it is as if a centralized mechanism considers the full graph and
computes shortest paths routes for everyone. However, when those devices are not used,
then the knowledge of the network is a private knowledge of i and must be explicitly kept
for each i. This means that we have implemented a new module in SUMO, which handles
the agent knowledge and do the routing in a different way than SUMO does, considering
partial information that the agent itself has about its environment.
1 http://sumo.sourceforge.net/
157




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
4. Scenario
The map used stems from the eastern part of São Paulo. Open street map (OSM, www.
osm.org) was used to export the objects existing in this area. For this work we are using
only links labeled as motorways, trunks, and primaries (OSM terminology). For short, we
call them all as arterials. However, since secondary links are also necessary for our work,
to mimic these we have created a grid of one-way links, which was added to the arterials
extracted from OSM. The resulting network is shown in Figure 1.
The following naming scheme is adopted here: Vertical, secondary links are la-
beled with lowercase letters, from a to k.  Horizontal, secondary links are labeled with
numbers, from 1 to 21. The arterial at the top of the map (roughly from nodes a2 to j1)
is a motorway (Marginal Tietê) that is a major source of traffic congestion. Traffic lights
were used in all intersections between two arterial roads, generated by SUMO with 40
seconds of green time for each direction and 1s of yellow time on transitions.
The demand pattern corresponds roughly to that observed in the eastern region
of the city.  Although all regions may serve as origins and destinations, to reflect the
morning peak, there are three main destinations districts shown in the map (Figure 1) as
roman numerals: one of them is downtown (a6-b12), one at a18-c21, and one through
a major motorway to the northeast (h1-j3). Regarding origins, the network G is divided
in 10 rectangular origin districts, each stretching along 5 horizontal edges and 4 vertical.
All origin/destination pairs have the same probability of being chosen for a vehicle.
A few special vehicles called probe or floating cars (FCs) were added to the simu-
lation to analyze the impact that the GPS-based routing has on neighborhood (local) traf-
fic. To do this, these FCs were created with custom routes that are restricted to secondary,
local links.  Henceforward we refer to these FCs by their route names:  East (meaning
route j20 → j8 → i8) and Center (route f10 → f18).
Two routing strategies were used, both based on the A* algorithm. For simulating
158




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
Table  1.  Travel times  (average over all travelers) with increasing demand, for
situations without and with navigation devices.
Demand                                                                                                     Without Navigation Device                           With Navigation Device
N                                                                                               Mean (s)   Std. Dev.                   Mean (min)   Mean (s)   Std. Dev.                Mean (min)
5000                                                                                            1948       3.33%                       32           1116       1.36%                    19
10000                                                                                           4012       2.88%                       67           1910       0.59%                    32
15000                                                                                           6313       2.40%                       105          2940       2.06%                    49
20000                                                                                           9017       2.02%                       150          4063       2.36%                    68
25000                                                                                           12803      7.43%                       213          5240       6.17%                    87
the usage of navigation devices (thus all links may be used), all routes were computed with
global topological knowledge, favoring wider roads: the cost of each link was computed
as its length divided by its number of lanes. The other case is the one in which the traveler
has only restricted knowledge.  We remark that this means that each driver only has a
mental map containing the arterials links plus the knowledge of the links that belong to
its origin and destination districts. Therefore routes were computed considering the real
costs for these links.  Farther or unknown secondary links were assigned a high cost so
that they are avoided.
As mentioned, all simulations were performed in the SUMO traffic simulator. The
routing strategy - with or without navigation devices, i.e., global or partial topological
information - and the number of generated vehicles were varied orthogonally. For each
combination of those parameters, the new implemented module in SUMO was used to
create the drivers and generate the trips from the OD matrix.
5. Results
The results obtained so far are the average over five repetitions of the simulations for each
combination of parameters. We have varied the demand created in the network G, i.e., the
number of travelers, as well as the type of routing (with/without navigation device). |N |
was set from 5K to 25K users. We note that although the morning peak for the city of São
Paulo (apart from other parts of the metropolitan region) may reach 700K simultaneous
users, we are only considering a portion of the eastern part of the city.  Besides, only a
fraction of the secondary roads were represented. Hence the reduced demand.
Table 1 shows the mean travel time in seconds as well as the standard deviation.
To facilitate the comparison, the travel times are also given in minutes. As expected, the
travel time increases with the increase of the demand.
Regarding the comparison between the situations without and with use of naviga-
tion devices, there is a remarkable decrease in these times in the latter case. The reason
is that the demand is more distributed in the network. Moreover, the higher the demand,
the higher the utility of using those devices. When |N | = 25000, there is a decrease of
approximately 60% in the travel time.
These results refer to the overall travel time (over all travelers). We now turn to
more microscopic analyses that are possible when agent-based simulations are used. In
the case here we are analyzing travel times of travelers with different route lengths. Due
to lack of space we do not show the plots of travel times for travelers in each class of
159




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
Table 2. Travel times for the floating cars; situations without and with navigation
devices.
Demand                                                                                           Trip     Without Nav. Device   With Nav. Device   Increase
N                                                                                                         Mean (min)            Mean (min)
5000                                                                                             Center   5                     5                  ≈ 0%
                                                                                                 East     10                    13                 ≈ 30%
10000                                                                                            Center   5                     6                  ≈ 20%
                                                                                                 East     23                    39                 ≈ 70%
15000                                                                                            Center   5                     15                 ≈ 200%
                                                                                                 East     37                    61                 ≈ 65%
20000                                                                                            Center   5                     24                 ≈ 380%
                                                                                                 East     49                    103                ≈ 110%
25000                                                                                            Center   6                     36                 ≈ 500%
                                                                                                 East     61                    135                ≈ 120%
trip length. The main conclusion drawn is that travel time when not using GPS is higher
only if the trip is longer than 5 kilometers. Below this, for each class of length, trips take
roughly the same time, no matter whether GPS is used or not. Thus, the above mentioned
conclusion that navigation devices do pay off was drawn from the fact that most trips take
longer than 5 kilometers.
Another kind of analysis that an agent-based simulation allows aims at answering
the second question that we want to investigate in this work, namely what happens to
those travelers called neighborhood or local travelers. As presented in Section 4, we have
defined some special floating cars whose travel times were also measured. These travel
times appear in Table 2.
If we look at the travel times of the FCs, here the opposite behavior is observed
regarding travel times. When the whole population of travelers does not use navigation
devices, neighborhood travelers realize their trips in a lesser time because they, by def-
inition, use only secondary links.  When all travelers may use the resources that were
previously used only by the neighborhood travelers, these are penalized.  This penalty
increases with the size of the demand.  For instance, taking the floating cars driving in
the center route, when the demand is 10K travelers, their average travel time is 5 minutes
(no navigation device) versus 6 minutes (device is used by other drivers). However, when
the demand is 25K travelers, these figures increase to 6 and 36 minutes respectively. This
means an increase of more than 400% in travel time for this particular floating car.
6. Conclusion
In many metropolitan areas, one may nowadays observe the spreading use of navigation
devices such as those based on GPS. Although we all seem to enjoy this help, little has
been investigated about the effects of this use, especially on the travelers whose routes did
not involve major arterials, being restricted to secondary links of the traffic network, while
the majority of other travelers would use primarily arterials (secondary links only close
to their origins and destinations), which are part of their respective mental maps.  Two
questions then arise. The first is whether travel time decreases if navigation devices gets
widely used, while the second question relates to the effects of the use of these devices on
160




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
travelers who use the network only for short trips in their own neighborhood, thus tending
to avoid arterials.
Our long term goal is to develop an agent-based infrastructure  (possibly over
SUMO) that can be used for this and further investigations that are key to evaluate con-
cepts of smart transportation systems. With this prototype, we have simulated thousands
of agents that compute their own route based either on global knowledge of the traffic
network, coming from navigation devices, or based on their mental maps of the network,
which are necessarily partial.
By means of the agent-based approach we were able to derive conclusions that
would not be possible if only macroscopic methods were used, as for instance the fact
that there are differences in the value of the navigation devices depending on the trip
length.  Also, we have shown that although the population of travelers have decreased
travel time, this impacts a minority of them, namely those that do neighborhood trips
and/or avoid arterials, concentrating their trips on secondary links. For these, the increase
in travel time can be manifold.
We are aware that this model is a preliminary one. As part of a joint work with
DLR, the developer of SUMO, we are working together in order to provide SUMO with
the modules that will facilitate the modelling and simulation of agent-based transportation
systems.  The focus is of course on simulating new technologies such as use of smart-
phones and other devices, as well as car-to-car communication.  We are also aware of
the necessity of calibrating the model, but this has probably to be done with data freely
available (e.g., the repository www.bgu.ac.il/˜bargera/tntp), given the lack of
data for the scenario used here.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the RNP (Cidades Inteligentes Call), CNPq for the support
to the project LabTrans and for the partial support to the authors, and the anonymous
reviewers for suggestions of future work regarding self-organization.
References
Balmer, M., Cetin, N., Nagel, K., and Raney, B. (2004). “Towards truly agent-based traffic
and mobility simulations”. In Jennings, N., Sierra, C., Sonenberg, L., and Tambe, M.,
editors, Proceedings of the 3rd International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multi Agent Systems, AAMAS, volume 1, pages 60-67, New York, USA. New
York, IEEE Computer Society.
Bazzan, A. L. C., Amarante, M. B., and da Costa, F. B. (2012). Management of demand
and routing in autonomous personal transportation. Journal of Intelligent Transporta-
tion Systems, 16(1):1-11.
Chmura, T. and Pitz, T. (2007).  An extended reinforcement algorithm for estimation
of human behavior in congestion games.  Journal of Artificial Societies and Social
Simulation, 10(2).
Kl ügl, F. and Bazzan, A. L. C. (2004). Route decision behaviour in a commuting scenario.
Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 7(1).
161





