VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
Towards a Process for Negotiation of E-contracts Involving
Web Services
Gabriel Costa Silva1, Itana Maria de Souza Gimenes2, Marcelo Fantinato3, Maria
Beatriz Felgar de Toledo4
1Coordenação do Curso de Ciências da Computação - Universidade Tecnológica
Federal do Paraná (UTFPR)
Caixa Postal 271 - 87301-006 - Campo Mourão - PR - Brasil
2
Departamento de Informática - Universidade Estadual de Maringá (UEM) - Maringá,
PR, Brasil
3Curso de Sistemas de Informação - Escola de Artes, Ciências e
Humanidades/Universidade de São Paulo (EACH/USP) - São Paulo, SP - Brasil
4Instituto de Computação - Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP) -
Campinas, SP - Brasil
gabrielcosta@utfpr.edu.br, itana@din.uem.br, m.fantinato@usp.br,
beatriz@ic.unicamp.br
Abstract.  Organizations  involved  in  cooperative  business  processes  have
different interests and points of view. A negotiation allows them to discuss
their interests and requirements in order to reach an acceptable agreement.
We  propose  an  integrated  web  service  negotiation  process  that  considers
human  interaction  and  the  use  of  different  protocols.  It  focuses  on  the
application  of  feature  modelling  to  describe  the  negotiated  services.  Our
contributions  include:                                                                       (i)  the  definition  of  a  negotiation  process;   (ii)  the
definition of a conceptual model to support the negotiation of web services;
(iii) reuse of artefacts generated throughout the negotiation process; and (iv)
coverage of critical elements in the negotiation of electronic contracts.
1. Introduction
Organizations around the world are looking for means to ensure competiveness. Global
cooperation has been considered a key factor. Business process outsourcing associated
with internet technology offer a computational support that enable organizations to find
partners, undertake negotiations and monitor the quality of contracted services even
beyond geographical, cultural and technological limits [Grefen et al. 2006].
The  web  service  technology,  together  with  business  process  management
concepts and tools offer a set of resources and standards  [Papazoglou  2008; Weske
2010]  that  facilitate  inter-organizational  cooperation.  Business  processes              (BP)  are
composed  of  electronic  services  (e-services).  Service  consumers  look  for  e-service
providers  to  compose  optimal  BP  that  join  core  internal  competences  and  the
outsourcing of e-services that are not their focus. These BP are regulated by electronic
contracts (e-contracts).
A  successful  BP  needs  to  take  into  account  the  different  interests  of
organizations. Interests have to be discussed before an e-contract can be established.
267




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
Thus, it is important to provide support for e-service negotiation [Grefen et al. 2006].
Negotiation is an interaction process amongst two or more partners in which their goal
is to reach a mutually acceptable agreement [Zlatev 2002]. Electronic negotiation (e-
negotiation) is the process of conducting negotiations amongst business partners using
electronic means. The partner in this process can be represented either by a human
negotiator or a software agent [Rinderle and Benyoucef 2005]. The interactions amongst
partners are guided by the rules of the negotiation protocols [Kim and Segev 2003].
These rules define how the partners exchange offerings and decide on how to proceed or
end a negotiation. In the e-service context, the negotiation process is a requirement to
reach an agreement [Grefen et al. 2006] and then establish an e-contract.
Several models [Lin 2008], frameworks [Comuzzi, Kritikos and Plebani 2009]
and support systems  [Kersten and Lai  2007] for e-negotiation have been proposed.
There are also works related to negotiation protocols [Ueyama and Madeira 2001] and
electronic markets [Mukhtar et al. 2009]. Although some studies regard the negotiation
amongst  software  agents  [Al-Aaidroos,  Jailani  and  Mukhtar  2011],  the  negotiation
literature shows that the current industry scenario is still based in human interaction
[Lin 2008]. However, there is a lack of support to negotiation of e-services involving
human interaction in the context of the web service technology. Thus, it is necessary to
conceive and provide computational support to a process that guides the preparation and
conduction of e-contract negotiation.
This paper presents a process that supports negotiation of e-contracts involving
web services (WS-contracts). The process takes into account interaction amongst human
negotiators and the use of different negotiation protocols. In addition, a feasibility study
of the process is discussed. A prototype of a computer-aided support environment was
developed for this purpose. The proposed negotiation process is provided within the
context of a well-defined approach, called PL4BPM - Product Line for Business Process
Management  [Fantinato et al.  2009], and its respective support environment, called
FeatureContract [Fantinato, Gimenes and Toledo 2010].
This paper is structured as follows. We present the research background, which
is  mainly  concerned  with  BP,  e-contract  and  PL4BPM.  Next,  the  proposed  WS-
negotiation-process and its activities are presented. We then present a feasibility study
developed to evaluate the proposed process, illustrated with snapshots of the developed
prototype.   Finally, we analyse related works and present the conclusions.
2. Background
Using web services technology, a software can be decomposed into self-contained,
loosely coupled and language independent units [Papazouglou 2008]. BP can be used to
compose web services; to integrate systems; to compose complex applications through
services grouping and coordination; and, to establish partnerships in distributed system
development. A BP consists of a set of tasks undertaken in a specific sequence to
achieve  a  business  goal                                                                      [Weske  2010].  It  also  represents  constraints  on  activities
execution order as well as possible interactions between them.
An e-contract is a document used to represent an agreement amongst parties
which is basically composed of: product or service definition; rights, obligations and
prohibitions;  and,  actions  to  be  taken  in  case  of  disagreements.  Contracts  can  be
complex and their establishment process is often cumbersome due to the large number
268




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
of parameters involved in the selection of Quality of Service (QoS) attributes and levels.
Thus, a negotiation amongst the parties is necessary to define the issues involved in
establishing an e-contract [Grefen et al. 2006].
PL4BPM aims to provide support both to model variability in BP and web
services, and to monitor WS-contracts throughout the process execution  [Fantinato,
Gimenes  and  Toledo  2010].  It  is  designed  to  model  the  artefacts  involved  in  the
negotiation amongst organizations willing to establish a WS-contract to regulate their
cooperation. Feature  modelling  allows  the  representation  of  e-services  and  possible
levels of QoS attributes. A feature model is represented through a tree-like diagram
[Czarnecki, Helsen and Eisenecker 2005]. We have developed a feature meta-model in
which  the  e-services  feature  diagram  consists  of  two  sub-trees,  identified  by  the
following pre-named root features:  (i) e-services sub-tree  that contains the  features
representing the e-services provided by an organization; and, (ii) qos-attribute sub-tree
that contains  the  features  representing the  QoS  attributes and  levels  which  can  be
associated to the e-services.
3. The WS-Negotiation process
The WS-negotiation-process proposed in this paper has the following principles: (i) it
focus on negotiation amongst organizations interested in undertaking a collaborative BP
composed of web services;  (ii) it promotes the reuse of the core artefacts produced
throughout the negotiation processes; (iii) it supports decision making throughout the
negotiation; (iv) it supports different negotiation protocols; and, (v) it takes into account
interaction between human negotiators.
The  WS-negotiation-process  is  carried  out  in  the  context  of  PL4BPM  as
presented  in  the  previous  section.  Its  conception  was  mainly  supported  by  the
negotiation framework proposed by Kim and Segev (2003) and the process model for e-
negotiation proposed by Kersten, Strecker and Law (2004).   The   process   consists   of
eleven activities, as shown in Figure 1, divided into two life cycles: the Planning
and   Negotiation   Agenda   Settings   and   the  Negotiating   and
Establishing  WS-Contract.  The  first  cycle  defines  the  elements  of  the
negotiation base, which are: (i) the negotiator roles; (ii) the business partners involved;
(iii) target services of the negotiation; (iv) the negotiation variables for each service and
their respective possible values; and, (v) the e-contract template. In the second cycle, the
actual negotiation amongst the parties takes place by selecting the offered services,
negotiating the variables of these services and finally, establishing the WS-contract.
3.1. The Negotiation Conceptual Model
The negotiation involves several related entities that compose the  negotiation base.
They are persistent elements defined in the first negotiation life cycle and used in the
second life cycle to undertake the actual negotiation. Moreover, the negotiation base can
be reused in further negotiations. The entities of the conceptual model are presented in
Figure 2. This model is an important contribution of our work.
A Negotiation is conducted within a Negotiation  Case, which is the
main element of the WS-negotiation-process. A Negotiation  Case belongs to only
one Negotiator who is its owner.  Each Negotiator has several Roles. An
invited Negotiator assumes a Role within a Negotiation which defines its
269




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
responsibility, such as “Credit Verification Service Provider”. It is a specialization of
the SOA  roles, thus an organization can be a consumer or a provider, for example.
The Role  cardinality defines the number of negotiators, in that role, that can win
the negotiation to provide and consume services at the end of the negotiation. For
example, in a negotiation for tourist package, two airlines can win a trip, one to go and
another to return, thus the cardinality is 2 (two). A Feature  Model  Template,
associated  with  a Role,  defines  groups  of e-services  (e-service  Group)
which are related to Negotiation  Variables. These variables represent QoS
Attribute(s) and e-service  Property (ies).
Figure 1. WS-negotiation-process model
A Negotiator is invited to participate of a Negotiation, playing a certain
Role, based on a Profile which contains personal information. Each Negotiator
receives a Feature  Model Instance that can be updated according to the services
that it can offer. According to the Negotiator interests, a Rating can be assigned
to each e-service and Negotiation  Variable. This Rating is part of the
information  base  used  by  negotiators  to  define  the  negotiation  Strategy.  The
Negotiator  (consumer) expresses its Interests by configuring the Feature
Model  Instance of its partner (provider).
The  Negotiation  is  guided  by  a  Protocol  that  defines  a  set  of
Activity(ies), like doing offers and counter-offers. Negotiation  Thread(s) are
formed   of  e-service   Group(s)   provided   by   a   negotiation   partner.   A
Negotiation   Thread   has   a  Rating.   A  Group   of  Thread   has   a
Cardinality. A successful Negotiation produces one or more WS-contracts
based on a WS-contract template.
3.2.                                                                                           Activities of the Planning and Negotiation Agenda Settings life cycle
The  planning  and  negotiation  agenda  settings  life  cycle  define  the  structure  used
through  entire  negotiation  process,  such  as:  items  being negotiated  (e-services  and
negotiation variable), partners and their roles, and rating for each negotiated issue.
270




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
(1) Create negotiation case: this activity defines the objective of the negotiation and
creates the negotiation case. The elements of a WS-contract negotiation are grouped
within  a  negotiation  case  [Wu,  Kersten  and  Benyoncef  2006].  The  attributes  of  a
negotiation case includes: a title, such as “Web-based graphical user interface”, a brief
description of the negotiation case that can be used in a directory where partners can
find negotiations of their interest; keywords; privacy information of the case; and the
deadline to end the negotiation in order to proceed to the WS-contract establishment.
Figure 2. The conceptual model of negotiation
(2) Specify roles and cardinalities: this activity creates the roles that negotiators can
have throughout a negotiation. The organization partners act within specific roles. A
role groups a set of partners capable of providing the same type of service. In the same
negotiation case there might be several roles. This activity also defines the negotiation
direction,  i.e.  if  the  consumer  search  for  providers  or  the  providers  search  for
consumers.  Finally,  cardinality  has  to  be  defined  for  each  role.  This  allows  the
consumer organization to acquire services provided by different organizations.
(3) E-services feature model elaboration: e-services to be contracted are represented
in  the  feature  model  as  a  template.  This  model  is  created  and  assigned  to  a  role
representing the set of services that the respective negotiator can offer. A negotiation
starts with an instance of this model, associated with each negotiator, which is updated
according to its capabilities to offer the services.   They can have one or more associated
negotiation variables, which represents an issue associated to the service that needs to
be negotiated. It is an item of evaluation that supports the negotiator. An usual example
of negotiation variable is price [Marchione et al. 2010]. PL4BPM considers two main
types of negotiation variables: e-services properties and QoS attributes.
(4) Setting the rates: negotiators have different interests, whereas offering a service
may be an advantage for a negotiator, it might not be for another. Thus, rates represent
the importance of each negotiation item for a negotiator. They are assigned to: group of
services, services and negotiation variables. The rates of a group of services vary from 0
(lowest) to 100 (highest). The rate of a service varies from 0 to the rate value of its
group.  After  rating,  we  can  see  the  importance  of  each  service  for  the  involved
negotiators, such as organizations B, C and D. At  this  moment,  only  the  negotiation
271




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
driver (the one that creates the negotiation case) is capable of rating the items of its
interest because the negotiators were not invited yet. When further negotiators start their
participation, each of them has to assign rates to its feature model. These rates are
strategic information because they directly express the negotiator preferences. Thus,
they are private information that cannot be shared amongst negotiators. They are used to
support the selection of the offers.
(5) Assign partners to a specific role: Negotiators are invited when they are previously
known or they can be found in public directories. They can also offer themselves to
participate of a negotiation when a call is made. When a negotiator is associated to a
role, it receives the feature model instance based on feature model template for that role.
It allows the negotiator to update its own feature model in the next process activity.
(6) E-services feature model update: a partner may either not be capable of providing
the services or even provide additional services. Thus, it is necessary that the provider
organization  revise  its  feature  model  instance  to  represent  its  capabilities.  In  the
negotiation literature, it is usually part of the negotiation agenda configuration [Kersten,
Strecker and Law 2004]. It may demand modifications in the group of services, services
and negotiation variables according to provider organizations.
(7) WS-contract template creation: this activity creates the WS-contract template that
contains information that can be used in any similar contract established from the
defined feature model.
3.3.                                                                                              Activities of the Negotiating and establishing WS-contract life cycle
The negotiating and establishing WS-contract life cycle uses the structure defined in the
first life cycle to support the negotiation amongst partners. The services offered are
selected to be contracted. The negotiation of the variable values of these services is
carried out and, finally the WS-contract is established.
(8) E-services feature model configuration: the consumer selects the services and
negotiation variables of its interest according to the instances of the feature model
provided by the negotiators. There can be competing services and complementary ones.
(9) Set up groups of negotiation threads: each service negotiated between a provider
and a consumer results in a negotiation thread. A group of negotiation thread has a
cardinality  that  is  inherited  from  a  role  and  can  be  updated  to  define  how  many
organizations can provide this group of services in particular.
(10) Execution of negotiation protocol: a negotiation protocol defines both style and
rules that guide the bidding process. The negotiation proceeds or ends according to
these rules. Our negotiation process can support the most common negotiation styles,
such as bargain and auction. During the negotiation protocol execution, each service
needs to be negotiated aiming at reaching an agreement amongst partners. Following the
rules and observing the cardinalities, the winners of each negotiation thread are selected.
The  players  can exchange  short  messages  throughout  our  negotiation  process.  The
amount of providers that can provide a group of services is defined by the cardinality of
the role and the group of negotiation thread.
(11) WS-contract establishment: having defined the services and providers, the last
activity can be executed. It consists of generating an instance of the WS-contract based
272




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
on the template defined in first cycle of the negotiation process. The final WS-contract
contains the service contracted by each winner organization of the negotiation.
4. Feasibility Study
A feasibility study was carried out to analyse the WS-negotiation process with the
purpose  of  providing evidence  of  its feasibility and  usage  relevance.  Thus,  in this
section we focus on the results obtained in this study. A computer-supported prototype
was developed to automatize the proposed negotiation process. However, its details of
operation will be discussed in other paper, thus they were omitted here. This prototype
was used in the feasibility study to support the participants.
4.1.                                                                                           The scenario domain
The study was applied to a hypothetical scenario where an inter-organizational BP
involves four types of organizations: a travel agency, hotels, airlines and car rental
companies. This  scenario  involves:                                                           (i)  organizations  where  one  is  a  consumer
organization (Travel Agency) and three are providers (Hotel, Airline and Car rental);
(ii) negotiators, people that represent organizations throughout the negotiation; and (iii)
services offered. From the WS-negotiation-process point of view, we consider that the
travel agency is looking for providers to operate its BP, thus it will negotiate services to
establish  a  WS-contract  with  selected  providers.  Feature  models  provide  the
specification of the services looked for the travel agency. An example of the feature
model provided for the specification of the Airline services is shown in Figure 3. This
feature model specifies the group of service Ticket  management with services:
Seeking  ticket, Buying  ticket; and Cancel  ticket.
Figure 3. Feature model for the role of Airline Company
These services have a QoS  Attributes  sub-tree which is shown in
Figure 4. It has two QoS  Security and Availability. The possible levels for
the Security  are  authentication  by  user  (User  Auth)  or  public  authentication
(Public  auth).  The  QoS  attribute Availability  has  the  following  control
levels: 24x7, 24x5 and 8x5 (hours x weekdays).
273




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
In our hypothetical negotiation scenario the travel agency acts in the role of
consumer interested in contracting services from the providers. Several organizations
act in the role of providers with the following cardinalities:
•   Hotel: cardinality 1 (one) - the travel agency covers only one destination so it
is interested in contracting one hotel;
•   Airline: cardinality 2 (two) - the agency can hire one company to go and
another to return;
•   Car  rental: cardinality 999 (any number) - the client can rent different cars
for each occasion.
Figure 4. Feature model representing the QoS attributes of services
4.2.                                                                                        Execution and discussion
The feasibility study involved  5  (five) participants who are postgraduate students in
computer science. The participants had three hours of training, two for the negotiation
process techniques and one for the domain. They were divided into 4 (four) groups, one
group with two participants and 3 (three) with one. Each participant was representing a
role for one organization; except for the car rental organizations to which we had two
participants. The travel agency was the negotiation driver. The negotiation protocols
were bargain, auction and fixed-price. The participants were allocated in one room, each
in  a  computer  running  the  prototype  of  the  WS-negotiation  process  support
environment. The participants executed the eleven activities of the process. At the end
they filled a questionnaire.
Data collected from the questionnaire were analysed regarding the feasibility
and usage relevance of the WS-negotiation-process. Table 1 shows the analysed issues
and the percentage of participant answers. Overall results show that participants were in
favour of the WS-negotiation process feasibility and usage relevance. When asked about
if the activity were clearly defined, 100% of the participants have agreed. Nevertheless,
only 20% of the participants find the WS-negotiation-process easy to apply.
274




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
They all considered the training satisfactory but 40% of them required assistance
during  the  negotiation  process.  We  did  not  consider  this  relevant,  as  the  set  of
technological issues is really large for beginners.
Participants were asked if they consider the WS-negotiation process feasible.
100% of them considered the process useful and relevant so they would apply it again.
They confirm that there are advantages of using the process as compared to informal
negotiation.  100% of the participants agreed that all the partners involved can have
benefits from the process support.
Table 1. Data collected from the participants of the feasibility study
We considered the prototype a threat of validity to the experiment, as it provides
only the basic functions and a simple user interface. Some difficulties faced by the
participants  were  related  to  the  prototype  stage  of  the  support  environment.  A
questionnaire was also applied to detect the experience of participants with the subject.
Most of  them have  studied the subjects in the academic  context but did not have
previous contact with the involved concepts.
5. Related Work
Negotiation is a multidisciplinary area, thus it is discussed in  [Bichler, Kersten and
Strecker 2003]: psychology, economy and computer science. We could not find works
that apply the same ideas of our approach towards modelling e-service negotiation. In
particular, in the use of feature modelling to describe the negotiated services and its
focus on artefact reuse. However, some works provided a solid background.
We mainly point out at: (i) the frameworks of Comuzzi, Kritikos and Plebani
(2009), Mukhtar et al. (2009) and Kim and Segev (2003); (ii) the processes of Kersten,
Strecker and Law (2004), Chiu et al. (2005) and Elfatraty and Layzell (2004); and, (iii)
the model of Lin  (2008) to support negotiation in electronic environment. Table  2
highlights  items  that  we  use  to  compare  related  works  to  ours.  The  items  are:
application area, multi-parties, multi-protocols, multi-items, multi-variables, support to
decision making, human interaction throughout negotiation, e-contracts, web services
and reuse of artefacts.
275




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
Comuzzi,  Kritikos  and  Plebani                                                             (2009)  propose  a  framework  that  aims  at
discovering the negotiation protocol supported by the negotiators.  It focuses on an
important issue, which is the cooperation amongst partners, but it only deals with part of
the negotiation process. Mukhtar  et  al.                                                    (2009)  propose  an  integrated  framework  for
electronic  markets.  Although  it  integrates  technologies  like  internet  and  SMS  to
automate negotiation activities, it only deals with one scenario.
The  Kim  and  Segev  (2003)  framework  and  the  Kersten,  Strecker  and  Law
(2004) process provide basis for the conception of e-negotiation systems. They provide
support  for  negotiation  in  dynamic  environments;  however,  they  do  not  take  into
account WS-contracts specific issues of web services, such as QoS.
Chiu et al. (2005) proposes a process and a metamodel for contract negotiation
in B2B domain. However, it does not allow simultaneous negotiation of several items.
Elfatatry and Layzell (2004) presents a negotiation process composed of three phases
which defines favourite providers, roles and the establishment of a reliable negotiators
database. However, details about the activities and artefacts are not provided.
Lin  (2008) presents a conceptual model to specify a negotiation process in a
service-oriented environment. The model defines a set of functionalities to each SOA
element throughout the negotiation process as well as the interaction protocol amongst
them.  However,  this  model  is  limited  to  one provider  and  one  consumer for  each
negotiation, which constrains the specification of more complex negotiation such as
supply chains.
Table 2. Features of negotiation processes
Our negotiation process tackles the gaps of these works by taking into account
web services negotiations which deals with: multi-parties, multi-protocols, multi-items,
multi-variables, decision making, human interaction and artefact reuse.
6. Conclusions
This paper presents a negotiation process applied to support the establishment of WS-
contracts involving BP composed of web services. The negotiation process takes place
276




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
in  an  environment  that  facilitates  artefact  reuse  based  on  product  line  and  feature
modelling concepts. The negotiation process is composed of two main life cycles: (i) the
Planning and Negotiation Agenda Settings and  (ii) the Negotiating and Establishing
WS-Contract.   In addition to the proposed process a computer-supported prototype was
developed and used in a feasibility study, which aimed at providing evidences of the
feasibility and usage relevance of the process. The results confirmed that the proposed
process is feasible and its usage is relevant for all the roles involved. However, we
understand that an experiment with specialists is needed.
The  contributions  of  this  work  include:                                                      (i)  the  definition  of  a  negotiation
process;                                                                                          (ii)  the  definition  of  a  conceptual  model  to  support  the  negotiation  of  e-
services; (iii) reuse of artefacts generated throughout the negotiation process; and (iv)
coverage of critical elements in the negotiation of electronic contracts, such as role,
features of electronic services and contract models.
Future work includes the study of renegotiation in the context of the proposed
conceptual model of negotiation. Although renegotiation is similar to negotiation in
terms of roles, protocols, strategies and others, it appears more rarely in the literature.
[Vecchiato et al. 2010] extended the WS-contract feature meta-model to contain actions
and restrictions to contemplate renegotiation. Therefore, this new WS-Contract model
will  be  further  incorporated  to  our  proposed  negotiation  conceptual  model  of
negotiation to deal with renegotiation.
References
Al-Aaidroos, M., Jailani, N., Mukhtar, M. (2011) “Agent-based negotiation framework
for  web  service's  SLA”,  Proceedings  of  the                                                  7th  International  Conference  on
Information Technology in Asia: Emerging Convergences and Singularity of Forms
(CITA 2011), Kuching, pp. 1-7.
Bichler,  M.,  Kersten,  G.  and  Strecker,  S.  (2003).  Towards  a  Structured  Design  of
Electronic Negotiations. In Group Decision and Negotiation, Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 311-
335.
Comuzzi, M., Kritikos, K. and Plebani, P.  (2009)  “A semantic-based framework for
supporting negotiation in Service Oriented Architectures”, Proceedings of the 2009
IEEE Conference on Commerce and Enterprise Computing (CEC 2009), London, pp.
137-145.
Chiu, D.K., Cheung, S.C., Hung, P.C., Chiu, S.Y. and Chung, A.K. (2005). Developing
e-Negotiation support with a meta-modeling approach in a web services environment.
In Decision Support Systems, Vol. 40, No. 1, pp. 51-69.
Czarnecki, K., Helsen, S. and Eisenecker, U.  (2005). Staged Configuration through
Specialization  and  Multi-Level  Configuration  of  Feature  Models.  In  Software
Process: Improvement and Practice, Vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 143-169.
Elfatatry, A. and Layzell, P. (2004). Negotiating in service-oriented environments. In
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 47, No. 8, pp. 103-108.
Fantinato,  M.,  Gimenes,  I.M.S.  and  Toledo,  M.B.F.                                           (2009)                                                                                   “Product  Line  in  the
Business Process Management Domain”, in K.C. Kang, V. Sugumaran and S. Park
(eds.), Applied Software Product Line Engineering, Auerbach Publications, London,
pp. 497-530.
277




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
Grefen, P., Ludwig, H., Dan, A. and Angelov, S. (2006). An analysis of web services
support  for  dynamic  business  process  outsourcing.  In  Information  and  Software
Technology, Vol. 48, No. 11, pp. 1115-1134.
Kersten, G.E., Strecker, S.E. and Law, K.P. (2004) “Protocols for electronic negotiation
systems: theoretical foundations and design issues”, in K. Bauknecht, M. Bichler and
B. Pröll (eds.), EC-Web 2004 LNCS Vol. 3182, Springer, Berlin, pp. 106-115.
Kersten, G.E. and Lai, H. (2007). Negotiation support and e-negotiation systems: An
overview. In Group Decision and Negotiation, Vol. 16, No. 6, pp. 553-586.
Kim, J.B. and Segev, A.  (2003)  “A Framework for Dynamic eBusiness Negotiation
Processes”,  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  International  Conference  on  E-Commerce
Technology, Los Alamitos, pp. 84-91.
Lin, J.A. (2008). A conceptual model for negotiating in service-oriented environments.
In Information Processing Letters, Vol. 108, No. 4, pp. 192-203.
Marchione,  F.,  Fantinato,  M.,  Toledo,  M.B.F.  and  Gimenes,  I.M.S.  (2010).  “Price
Definition  in  the  Establishment  of  Electronic  Contracts  for  Web  Services”.  In
International Journal of Web and Grid Services (IJWGS), to be published: Vol. 6,
No. 4, pp. 357-384.
Mukhtar,  M.,  Yahya,  Y.,  Jailani,  N.,  Abdullah,  S.  and  Abdullah,  Z.                (2009)                                                                                 “An
integrated e-marketplace framework: A case study of wood-based products industry
in  Malaysia”,  Proceedings  of  the                                                        2009  International  Conference  on  Electrical
Engineering and Informatics (ICEEI 2009), Bangi, pp. 314-320.
Papazoglou,  M.                                                                             (2008)  Web  Services:  Principles  and  Technology,  Prentice  Hall,
Harlow.
Rinderle,  S.  and  Benyoucef,  M.  (2005)  “Towards  the  automation  of  e-negotiation
processes  based  on  Web  services  -  A  modeling  approach”,  in  A.H.H.  Ngu,  M.
Kitsuregawa, E.J. Neuhold, J. Chung and Q.Z. Sheng (eds), WISE 2005 LNCS Vol.
3806, Springer, Berlin, pp. 443-453.
Ueyama,  J.  and  Madeira,  E.R.M.                                                          (2001)                                                                                 “An  Automated  Negotiation  Model  for
                                                                                            Electronic  Commerce”,  Proceedings  of  the  Fifth  International  Symposium  on
                                                                                            Autonomous Decentralized Systems Autonomous Decentralized Systems, Dallas, pp.
29-36.
                                                                                            Zlatev, Z.V. (2002) “Examination of the negotiation domain”, Technical Report, n.02-
                                                                                            39,  Centre  for  Telematics  and  Information  Technology,  University  of  Twente,
Enschede.
                                                                                            Vecchiato,  D.A.,  Toledo,  M.B.F.,  Fantinato,  M.  and  Gimenes,  I.M.S.             (2010)                                    “A
                                                                                            Feature-based  Toolkit  for  Electronic  Contract  Negotiation  and  Renegotiation”,
Proceedings  of  the  IADIS  International  Conference  WWW/Internet  2010  (IADIS
ICWI), Timisoara, pp. 3-10.
Weske, M. (2010) Business Process Management: Concepts, Languages, Architectures,
Springer, Berlin.
Wu, S., Kersten, G.E. and Benyoncef, M. (2006) “INSS-a new approach in designing
Web-based negotiation support systems”, Proceedings of the Montreal Conference on
e-Technologies, Montreal, pp. 1-15.
278





