VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
The UbiBus Project: Using Context and Ubiquitous
Computing to build Advanced Public Transportation Systems
to Support Bus Passengers
Vaninha Vieira1, Ana Carolina Salgado2, Patricia Tedesco2, Valeria Times2, Carlos
Ferraz3, Elisa Huzita4, Ana Paula Chaves5, Igor Steinmacher5
1Department of Computer Science - Federal University of Bahia - Salvador-BA, Brazil
2 Informatics Center - Federal University of Pernambuco - Recife-PE, Brazil
3C.E.S.A.R. - Recife- PE, Brazil
4Department of Informatics - State University of Maringá - Maringá-PR, Brazil
5UTFPR - Campo Mourão-PR, Brazil
vaninha@dcc.ufba.br,  {acs,  pcart,  vct,  cagf}@cin.ufpe.br,
emhuzita@din.uem.br,  {anachaves,igorfs}@utfpr.br
Abstract. Urban mobility is a problem that affects all cities. Providing real
time information that can assist citizens on planning their trips by choosing
times and itineraries more appropriate to their needs are essential on smart
cities. Our project, named UbiBus, investigates how Computational Context
and  Ubiquitous  Computing  can  be  applied  to  Intelligent  Transportation
Systems to aid bus passengers mobility on cities, since dynamic real-time
factors can affect transportation means. This paper describes the overall ideas
concerning the UbiBus Project and presents some of the applications under
development with their preliminary results.
1. Introduction
Big  cities  are  increasingly  suffering  from  the  problem  of  urban  mobility.  Several
problems, such as constant traffic jam, lack of investments in road infrastructure, and
poor quality of public transportation services make citizens daily life stressful and
complicated                                                                                    [Chaves  et  al.                    2011].  Stimulating  the  use  of  public  transportation  is
essential to support urban mobility, because it reduces the number of cars on public
roads [Barry 2010][Caulfield and O’Mahony 2007].
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) aim “to combine high technology and
improvements  in  information  systems,  communication,  sensors,  and  advanced
mathematical  methods  with  the  conventional  world  of  surface  transportation
infrastructure" [Sussman 2005]. APTS (Advanced Public Transportation Systems) is a
subarea of ITS interested on providing passengers information and technologies to
enhance public transportation system operations [Sussman 2005]. APTS often involves
situations and objects related to issues such as navigation, mobility and traffic, i.e.,
aspects that have greatly vary their behavior. Thus, APTS users need transportation
information  to  be  available  “anytime,  anywhere,  from  any  device”  [Weiser  1991].
Understanding  the  context  of  transportation  vehicles                                      (e.g.  current  location,  speed,
availability), routes (e.g. traffic jam, accidents, obstructions), passengers (e.g. physical
55




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
disability, preferences, tourism) or environmental conditions (e.g. rush hour, rainy days,
natural disasters) are essential for APTS systems to better assist passengers.
In our work we investigate how the Ubiquitous Computing [Weiser 1991] and
Computational Context [Schilit et al 1994] areas can support APTS development. In this
light,  we  propose  a  ubiquitous,  context-sensitive  advanced  public  transportation
solution, called UbiBus [Vieira et al 2011]. UbiBus objectives include to specify and to
implement technological solutions (e.g. models, algorithms, tools and applications) to
support real time information delivery about public transportation, in particular urban
buses  (e.g.  route  recommendation,  bus  location  and  arrival  time  estimative,  traffic
occurrences). Applications being developed use real time context information collected
from  different  sources,  considering  vehicles  and  passengers  mobility,  and  dynamic
factors that can affect the transportation (e.g. occurrences on the routes). To support the
ubiquity principles, applications can be accessed seamlessly from different devices (e.g.
desktops, terminals on bus stops, displays inside a bus or mobile phones).
This  paper  presents  the  overall  ideas  and  preliminary  results  on  UbiBus.  It
discusses related work in Section 2. Section 3 describes its overall architecture. Some
preliminary results achieved with implemented applications are presented in Section 4.
Finally, Section 5 presents our final considerations and ongoing work.
2. Related Work
Several applications have been developed to assist users in finding out information
about public transportation means in a city. Waze1 generates maps according to the
route informed by the user, and presents traffic data collected in real time from other
people who are also using the software [Ogliari 2011]. OneBusAway [Ferris et al 2010]
is directed to bus users in Seattle and its vicinity, and presents all bus stops closer to the
user’s location, the lines associated to each stop and their current schedules, updated in
real time by the bus company; it also provides a web interface that displays a map with
the bus stops’ locations and the timetables for all vehicles associated to those stops.
ToTransit2  displays  the  street-cars  location  in  Toronto,  Canada,  with  information
provided, in real time, by the transportation companies; Bus Maps London3 shows static
information about bus stops, routes and schedules for the city of London-UK. Google
Maps4 also presents APTS features for some cities, allowing people to plan their routes
using public transportations. Moreover, Google Maps API is used to compose most of
the applications mentioned on this section.
Despite  those  initiatives,  it  is  difficult  to  obtain  dynamic  information  about
public transportation conditions, since many unexpected events may occur in the route
(e.g. traffic jams, accidents). Most solutions strongly depend on information provided
by official transportation companies and use proprietary methods and algorithms. Our
proposal aims to build open source systems with free available models, algorithms and
tools that can be used and evolved by the community, on different cities.
1 http://www.waze.com/
2 http://totransit.ca/
3 http://www.t                                                                                   .gov.uk/t   /gettingaround/maps/buses/
4 http://maps.google.com
56




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
3. The UbiBus Project
UbiBus investigates different aspects related to: (i) context acquisition, processing and
management for either static or dynamic information;  (ii) algorithms and models to
estimate  arrival  times  and  recommend  routes  and  vehicles;                                (iii)  geo  information
visualization and interpretation, considering large volume of data from transportation
and routes; (iv) middleware support for building context-sensitive ubiquitous systems;
and  (v)  development  of  adaptable,  multi-platform  applications  to  assist  passengers.
Figure 1 presents an overview of the UbiBus Architecture with its 5 main layers: Data,
Communication, Acquisition, Processing and Application.
The Data Level manages data processed by the system, including georeferenced
spatial  context  for  the  trajectories  of  moving  objects                                   (e.g.  vehicles  and  people).
Different dynamic context information about buses, bus stops and passengers may be
considered.  Data  on  the  positioning  of  mobile  objects  are  continually  updated,  to
represent their movements over time.
Figure 1. The UbiBus Architecture Overview [Vieira et al 2011]
The Communication Level allows the connection between static and dynamic
elements that compose the transportation infrastructure, allowing information exchange
in real time. Advances and standardization of wireless communication technologies
allows short and long-range communications. Information may be offered directly to
users,   considering   the   wide   availability   of   connectivity   based   on   wireless
communication  technologies  between  mobile  devices  and  laptops.  The  Acquisition
Level  is  responsible  for  gathering  static  and  dynamic  data  from  different  sources,
sending them to the Data Level. For instance, GPS systems installed on buses can
provide bus location and speed information; traffic level can be inferred by text mining
social networks; external meteorology systems may provide weather information; and
passengers’ location can be achieved by a mobile. The Processing Level uses acquired
contextual information along with mathematical and algorithmic solutions to calculate
other information, such as the estimated bus arrival time. It is also responsible for pre-
processing  acquired  information  ensuring  compatibility  between  different  context
sources and the incorporation of semantics to mobile elements trajectories.
57




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
The Application Level contains the different types of applications developed on
top of the UbiBus infrastructure. These applications should be adjusted to different
platforms and devices  (e.g. Web, desktop, mobile devices, terminals at bus stops or
displays inside a bus). Web applications should provide: i) arrival times for each bus at
each stop; ii) definition of best routes based on priorities (cost, time, comfort); iii) traffic
level in each area, route or region; iv) services to support the passenger on choosing the
vehicle according to preferences or needs; and others. Mobile applications are similar to
web  applications,  but  with  interface  adaptations  for  mobile  devices  and  also  the
possibility of using device's geographical position for more contextualized information.
Bus applications are available on terminals inside the buses and provide information
about the current trip, so passengers can visualize information about the trip and change
their  original  plans  due  to  unforeseen  events.  Bus  Station  applications  provides
information to passengers that are waiting for a bus in a bus stop regarding buses they
can take, estimated arrival time and their current location.
To  support  developing  different  types  of  applications,  UbiBus  proposes  a
multiparadigm, extensible and message oriented middleware for Ubiquitous Systems. It
encompasses the activities presented on the Communication, Acquisition and Processing
levels.  A  middleware  plays  an  important  role  in  developing  context  sensitive  and
ubiquitous  applications  since  it  facilitates  the  communication  and  coordination  of
distributed software components dealing, in a transparent way, with the difficulties and
complexities introduced by mobility and wireless communication [Souto et al 2004].
4. Preliminary Results
This section presents an overview of the preliminary results achieved with the UbiBus
project, concerning some developed applications, as described in the following.
4.1. Your City on Time (YCIT)
YCIT is a bus station application type proposed in [Caldas 2010]. It uses contextual
information  to  estimate  a  bus  arrival  time  at  a  given  bus  stop.  A  map  is  used  to
contextualize the bus location, whereas a table shows: the bus lines that serve that bus
stop; the current distance and estimated arrival time for each bus. To calculate the
estimated  arrival  time,  YCIT  considers  contextual  elements  such  as:  bus  location,
current speed and average speed; bus stop location; route stretch average speed and
traffic level. To infer traffic level in a stretch we used two incremental weighted update
formulas, proposed in [Sananmongkhonchai et al 2008]. The contextual elements bus
speed, bus location and bus average speed  are  acquired  from  GPS.  The  front-end
application uses the Google Maps API to provide directions and distances between a
bus and a bus stop in its itinerary. Currently, the application works on web browsers,
but we intend to migrate it to mobile phones to support passengers mobility.
4.2. UbibusRoute
UbibusRoute [Lima et al 2012] uses information coming from social networking sites
(in  this  first  prototype  we  have  used  Twitter)  to  recommend  routes  to  users,  thus
supporting them in their decision making processes. Based on the context of the user
and of the route and buses, the application computes the possible routes (for each user to
get to their destination), indicating on a map the route to follow. UbibusRoute was
designed as a client-server application, where the client is a mobile application (that can
58




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
work with any available operating system) that communicates with the server. The
application has two Databases: one stores contextual traffic data, and the other static
data (e.g. bus stops, bus lines and routes). The Server module is divided into three main
components:  the  Route  Identifier,  responsible  for  identifying  all  possible  routes
according to the user's location or the selected bus stop; the Route Indicator, responsible
for selecting the best route according to the user's preference (time, cost or distance); the
Contextual Information Extractor, that acquires information from social networks and
checks the current state of traffic. Additionally, there is a module (that wraps up the
social networks) that works in capturing information related to traffic.
4.3. EPITrans
The Extraction, Processing and Inference of Transport information  (EPITrans) is an
application  that  offers  updated  and  useful  information  to  the  users  extracted  from
Facebook messages on a map. It exploits the cooperation between the Facebook social
network users, by mining and extracting information related to the transit on the cities
from the messages posted by users. A navigable map points the most current traffic
events, informed by the users.
4.4. Occurrences reporting and visualization
We have proposed applications based on social network and crowdsourcing to support
information visualization about facts that occur and affect public transportation. They
access citizens’ knowledge about real-time conditions available on social networks or
other tools on the Internet. They are: (i) Collaborative routes editing is a tool integrated
to Facebook which enables users to collaboratively create routes that can be visualized
and edited by the user’s contacts [Alves et al 2011]. In the future, the users will be able
to indicate preferred routes, comment or give a reputation for a route, and others; (ii)
Occurrence report using mobile devices takes advantage of the mobility trend to enable
passengers to provide and get real time information about the public transportation they
are using; users can report facts that occur in their route (these facts will be posted as
Twitter messages) and retrieve facts that affect a given bus line; messages can be
visualized textually or in a map showing most recent occurrences;  (iii) Occurrence
reporting and visualization via web aims to enable users to report occurrences using a
collaborative  map;  recorded  occurrences  are  displayed  as  a  pointer  in  the  map,
facilitating  the  occurrence  location  identification;  and                                   (iv)  Traffic  conditions
visualization, a web application based on maps that aims to display the possibility of
traffic problems in a given location; it uses different colors in each section of a route,
based on amount, intensity and type of messages reported.
5. Conclusions and Further Work
This paper presented an overview of the UbiBus Project, a multi-institutional initiative
in the scope of smart cities, involving five institutions, being four universities and one
information company, that aims to integrate methods and techniques from several areas
(e.g. Ubiquitous Computing, Computational Context, Middleware and Geographical
Information Systems) to build solutions for the advanced public transportation systems.
The paper also presented some preliminary applications developed on the context of
UbiBus. The project is still in progress and there is much work to be done to achieve its
goals. Currently, we are working on refining the specification and development of the
59




VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas de Informação (SBSI 2012)
Trilhas Técnicas
five  levels  indicated  in  the  UbiBus  architecture                                              (Figure                                                         1),  the  Middleware  for
Ubiquitous Systems and on the applications described in Section 4, improving them and
identifying additional requirements. To evaluate the project ideas, we are in contact with
some cities transportation administrations to establish partnerships.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the CNPq (process 560135/2010-6) and [partially] supported by the
INES5. Authors thank UbiBus researchers from UFPE, UFBA, UTFPR, UEM and CESAR.
Special  thanks  to  Luiz  Caldas,  Vanessa  Gomes,  Adriano  Oliveira,  Tainan  Gomes  and  all
students involved on the development of the UbiBus applications.
References
Alves, L. P. S., Chaves, A. P., Steinmacher, I. F. Um aplicativo baseado em inteligência coletiva
para compartilhamento de rotas em redes sociais. VIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas
Colaborativos, Paraty-RJ, 2011
Barry, K. How smartphones can improve public transit. Wired Magazine, 2010.
Caldas, L. R. Desenvolvimento de Uma Solução Sensível ao Contexto Como Suporte a um
Sistema  de  Transporte  Público.  Monografia  de  Conclusão  de  Curso                             -  Ciência  da
Computação. 2010.
Caulfield, B., O’Mahony, M. An examination of the public transport information requirements
of users. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 8:1, 2007, 21-30.
Chaves, A. P., Steinmacher, I., Vieira, V. Social networks and collective intelligence applied to
public  transportation  systems:  A  survey.  In:  VIII  Simpósio  Brasileiro  de  Sistemas
Colaborativos, Paraty-RJ, 2011.
Ferris, B., Watkins, K., Borning, A. Location-aware tools for improving public transit usability.
IEEE Pervasive Computing, 9, 2010, 13-19 [http://www.onebusaway.org/]
Lima, V., Magalhães, F., Tito, A., Santos, R., Ristar, A., Santos, L., Vieira, V., Salgado, A.C.
UbibusRoute: Um Sistema de Identificação e Sugestão de Rotas de Ônibus Baseado em
Informações de Redes Sociais. VIII SBSI - Trilha de Ferramentas. São Paulo-SP, 2012.
Ogliari. R.   Crowdsourcing, muito melhor com mobile. Revista Espírito Livre, 26, 2011, 51-55.
Sananmongkhonchai, S., Tangamchit, P., Pongpaibool, P. Road traffic estimation from multiple
GPS  data  using  incremental  weighted  update.  In  Proc.  of                                     8th  Int.  Conf.  on  ITS
Telecommunications, Phuket, Thailand, 2008, 62-66.
Schilit, B., Adams, N., Want, R. Context-Aware Computing Applications. In Workshop on
Mobile Computing Systems and Applications. Santa Cruz, CA, 1994, 90-98.
Souto, E., Guimarães, G., Vasconcelos, G., Vieira, M., Rosa, N., Ferraz, C. A message-oriented
middleware for sensor networks, 2nd Workshop on Middleware For Pervasive and Ad-Hoc
Computing, Ontario, Canada, 2004, 127-134.
Sussman, J. Perspectives on Intelligent Transportation Systems. Springer, New York, USA,
2005.
Vieira, V., Caldas, L. R., Salgado, A. C. Towards an Ubiquitous and Context Sensitive Public
Transportation  System.  In:                                                                        4th  International  Conference  on  Ubimedia  Computing,  São
Paulo, 2011, 174-179.
Weiser, M., "The computer for the 21st century", Scientific American, 265:3. pp.66-75, 1991.
5 http://www.ines.org.br
60





